GOOD EVENING
EVERYONE AND WELCOME TO THE
OCTOBER 3RD MEETING OF THE ANN
ARBOR CITY COUNCIL.
IF YOU&apos;RE ABLE PLEASE RISE AND
JOIN US FOR A MOMENT OF SILENCE
FOLLOWED BY THE PLEDGE
OF ALLEGIANCE
PLEDGE ALLEGIANCE
TO THE FLAG THE UNITED STATES
OF AMERICA AND TO THE REPUBLIC
FOR WHICH IT STANDS ONE NATION
UNDER GOD INDIVISIBLE WITH
LIBERTY AND JUSTICE
WITH OUR
HEART.
PLEASE CALL THE ROLE OF COUNCIL
MAYOR, IF YOU CAN GIVE ME JUST
ONE SECOND.
I THINK WE&apos;RE NOT BROADCASTING
OVER THE ZONE.
&gt;&gt; ALL RIGHT.
THANK YOU.
WE&apos;LL TAKE A WE WILL PAUSE HERE
AND IN CHAMBERS UNTIL THIS GETS
RESOLVED FOR THE
AMERICAN
PEOPLE.
PART OF ME IS I CAN PROCEED
WITH REAL CALM.
WE&apos;RE READY WHEN YOU ARE.
THANK YOU.
COUNCIL MEMBER HAYNER PRESENT
COUNCILMAN REDISH PRESENT
COUNCILMAN GRISWOLD WILL
PRESENT COUNCILMAN FOR
OF COUNTERPROGRAM HERE BECAUSE
OF OUR DENHA HERE MAYOR TAYLOR
HERE BECAUSE OF OUR IHR HERE
PELTZMAN HERE, DALLAS MAVERICKS
HERE.
&gt;&gt; THAT&apos;S MY FAMILY IN
ATTENDANCE.
&gt;&gt; WE HAVE A QUORUM.
HAVE A MOTION PLEASE TO APPROVE
THE AGENDA.
MOVE BY COUNCIL BRITISH SECOND
KOTSENBURG GRAND DISCUSSION
OF THE AGENDA ON FAVOR POST THE
AGENDA IS APPROVED.
&gt;&gt; WE HAVE COMMUNICATIONS TODAY
FROM OUR CITY ADMINISTRATOR NO
MAYOR THANK YOU.
WE NOW HAVE AN INTRODUCTION
FROM THE CHAIR OF OUR
INDEPENDENT COMMUNITY POLICE
OVERSIGHT COMMISSION.
HER MONTHLY UPDATE DR. JACKSON,
DR. JACKSON CHAIR JACKSON, YOU
HAVE THE CONN
MAYOR.
&gt;&gt; DR. JACKSON IS JOINING US ON
ZOOME.
THANK YOU
.
&gt;&gt; HELLO.
I THINK I&apos;M GOING TO BE JOINED
BY THE ACTUAL CURRENT CHAIR
OF THE OVERSIGHT COMMISSION
.
&gt;&gt; MR. D&apos;ORO SHOULD BE JOINING
US ON ZOOME AS WELL.
HERE WE GO.
&gt;&gt; WE&apos;RE GOING TO DO A HANDOFF
TODAY SO FOR THOSE OF YOU WHO
DON&apos;T KNOW ME, I&apos;M LISA
JACKSON.
I&apos;VE BEEN THE CHAIR OF THE
INDEPENDENT COMMUNITY POLICE
OVERSIGHT COMMISSION FOR THE
LAST THREE YEARS.
I REMAIN OUT THE COMMISSION FOR
A BIT BUT I&apos;M STEPPING DOWN AS
CHAIR SO THIS WILL BE MY LAST
TIME ADDRESSING YOU IN THIS
CAPACITY AND IT&apos;S BEEN A
PRIVILEGE WORKING TO BRING
POLICE OVERSIGHT ISSUES INTO
THE PUBLIC CONSCIOUSNESS AND
I&apos;M REALLY LOOKING FORWARD TO
HOW OUR NEXT CHAIR FRANCIS TO
DRAW HARGREAVES WILL KEEP
POLICE OVERSIGHT MOVING
FORWARD.
OUR COMMISSION GAVE OUR FIRST
ADDRESS TO COUNCIL IN TWENTY
NINETEEN AS WE RETURNED FROM
OUR NATIONAL OVERSIGHT
CONFERENCE FOR THE FIRST TIME.
SO IT&apos;S FITTING THAT I BRING
THAT FULL CIRCLE TONIGHT.
JUST A COUPLE OF WEEKS AGO OUR
INCOMING VICE CHAIR STEPHANIE
CARTER AND OUR COMMISSIONER AND
CITY COUNCIL NOMINEES BE ON MY
WAY TO THE NATIONAL OVERSIGHT
CONFERENCE THE NATIONAL
ASSOCIATION FOR THE CIVILIAN
OVERSIGHT OF LAW ENFORCEMENT OR
NACOLE IS THE NATIONAL
OVERSIGHT BODY THAT DOES
TRAINING AND ACCREDITATION
OF OVERSIGHT PRACTITIONERS.
IT&apos;S COMPOSED OF OVERSIGHT
PROFESSIONALS FROM ALL OVER THE
UNITED STATES AS WELL AS
INTERNATIONAL OVERSIGHT GROUPS
AND THIS YEAR THEY WERE PEOPLE
FROM ABOUT 30 STATES MEXICO,
SIERRA LEONE AND SEVERAL
EASTERN EUROPEAN COUNTRIES IN
ATTENDANCE AND THE STRUCTURE IS
VERY WIDELY ALL ACROSS THE
COUNTRY.
SO THERE WERE OVERSIGHT
COMMISSIONERS THAT WERE
INVESTIGATING OTHERS THAT WERE
CITY ATTORNEYS.
THERE WERE EVEN COMMUNITY
MEMBERS WHO HAD HAD A CHILD
KILLED BY POLICE.
THERE WERE ELECTED OFFICIALS
AND OTHERS, ALL OF WHOM ARE
TRYING TO WORK HARD TO IMPROVE
POLICING ACROSS THE COUNTRY.
I WANT TO TALK A LITTLE BIT
ABOUT WHAT WE DID, WHAT WE
LEARNED AND HOW THAT RELATES TO
THE WORK WE DO IN ANN ARBOR.
WE ATTENDED SEMINARS ON
UNDERSTANDING THE IMPACT
OF TRAUMA AND BUILDING
RESILIENCE WHICH IS CRITICAL
FOR OVERSIGHT PROFESSIONALS.
WE ATTENDED SEMINARS ON SOCIAL
MEDIA USE AMONG LAW ENFORCEMENT
PERSONNEL AND ON ANALYZING THE
USE OF FORCE AND OTHER POLICE
DATA WHICH IS SOMETHING YOU
GUYS KNOW WE&apos;RE ACTIVELY
ENGAGED IN.
WE TALKED TO A SEMINAR ON HOW A
DETONATION BY THE LAPD BOMB
SQUAD WENT HORRIBLY WRONG AND
DEVASTATED
THE NEIGHBORHOOD AND
THAT MIGHT SEEM UNRELATED TO AN
IDEA BUT IN FACT IT HAD SEVERAL
PARALLELS TO SITUATIONS WE&apos;VE
SEEN IN AN HOUR INCLUDE THE
LAPD BREAKING INTO THE WRONG
HOUSE ON A HOME INVASION AND
HOW WAS HANDLED AFTERWARDS AND
IT BECAME CLEAR THAT OVERSIGHT
CAN HAVE A UNIQUE ROLE NOT ONLY
LOOKING AT HOW POLICIES AND
PROCEDURES WORK DIFFERENTLY IN
THE FIELD THAN THEY DO ON PAPER
BUT ALSO ON OUR ISSUES
OF FATIGUE AND INFREQUENT
TRAINING CAN MAKE SITUATIONS
HARDER FOR PEOPLE WHO LIVE AND
WORK HERE.
WE ALSO WENT TO A SESSION ON
SOMETHING THAT WE GET ASKED A
LOT ABOUT IN ANN ARBOR WHICH IS
PROVIDING VICTIM SERVICES TO
COMPLAINTS.
WE LEARN THAT THERE ARE OTHER
CITIES WHO OFFER TRAUMA
INFORMED COUNSELING SERVICES TO
THOSE WHO HAVE BEEN NEGATIVELY
IMPACTED BY POLICING.
SO THAT&apos;S SOMETHING THAT MAYBE
WE SHOULD CONSIDER OUR
COMMISSIONERS HAVE CERTAINLY
HEARD FROM SEVERAL ANAMUR
RESIDENTS ON HOW THEY FELT
TRAUMATIZED BY POLICE
INTERACTIONS BUT WEREN&apos;T ANY
BURNT BUT WEREN&apos;T OFFERED ANY
RESOURCES TO ADDRESS THAT HARM
.
WE WENT TO ANOTHER SESSION THAT
HAS PARTICULAR RELEVANCE FOR US
.
THE SECTION EXPLORED SEXUAL
MISCONDUCT IN LAW ENFORCEMENT
AND WHY ARE BEING SIMPLY AN
INTERNAL H.R. PROBLEM THAT
MISCONDUCT ACTUALLY MATTERS TO
THE COMMUNITY AS IMAGINE WHEN
POLICE OFFICERS ENGAGE IN
SEXUAL MISCONDUCT WITH OTHER
OFFICERS ARE ALSO MORE LIKELY
TO ENGAGE IN TRANSGRESSIONS
OF MANY KINDS IN THE PUBLIC.
SO IT&apos;S IMPORTANT TO CREATE A
CULTURE WHERE SEXUAL MISCONDUCT
IS NOT TOLERATED ON ANY LEVEL
WHEN POLICE OFFICERS GET A SLAP
ON THE WRIST IT DEMONSTRATES
THAT THAT BEHAVIOR IS NOT VERY
PROBLEMATIC.
SO THEY MIGHT CONTINUE TO
EXHIBIT SUCH MISCONDUCT.
IT COMMUNICATES TO OTHER
OFFICERS WHO HAVE BEEN
TRANSGRESSED UPON THAT THEY ARE
SOMEHOW LESS IMPORTANT WHICH
LEADS TO STRESSORS AND
RETENTION ISSUES.
ONE THING WE SEE FROM OUR
COMPLAINT REVIEW PROCESS IS
THAT THE PERCENTAGE
OF COMPLAINTS THAT ARE
SUSTAINED AGAINST OFFICERS IS
SIGNIFICANTLY HIGHER WHEN THE
OTHER COMPLAINANT IS AN
OFFICER.
YET IF THE CULTURE OF SEXUAL
MISCONDUCT IS TOLERATED IN THE
LAPD, HOW CAN WE EXPECT
CIVILIANS TO COME FORWARD TO
COMPLAIN ABOUT SEXUAL CONDUCT
IF THEY&apos;RE LESS LIKELY TO BE
BELIEVED?
WE&apos;VE ALREADY HAD DOCUMENTED
CASES OF SEXUAL MISCONDUCT IN
THE APD AGAINST CIVILIANS AND
OTHER OFFICERS AND I CAN&apos;T TELL
YOU THE NUMBER OF WOMEN WHO
TELL ME ABOUT SEXUAL MISCONDUCT
INCIDENTS WITH LAW ENFORCEMENT
BUT THEY INDICATE THEY&apos;D NEVER
FIRE A COMPLAINT FOR FEAR
OF RETALIATION OR NOT BEING
BELIEVED.
SO IT&apos;S REALLY CRITICAL THAT
THERE BE A CULTURE SHIFT IN THE
LAPD BOTH THE MENTAL HEALTH
OF OFFICERS BUT CERTAINLY FOR
THE SAFETY OF THE PUBLIC THAT
THEY ARE SWORN TO SERVE ONE
ENLIGHTENING SESSIONS THAT WE
WENT TO WAS ON ADDRESSING THE
WHITE SUPREMACY AND EXTREMISM
THAT EXISTS IN LAW ENFORCEMENT
THAT SESSIONS ON ACADEMIC
RESEARCH AND GOVERNMENT AUDITS
THAT SHOW THE PERVASIVENESS
OF WHITE SUPREMACY IN US LAW
ENFORCEMENT AND A CONTINUING
SERIES OF INCIDENTS DOCUMENTING
THE PRESENCE OF EXTREMIST
GROUPS AND VIEWS AMONG LAW
ENFORCEMENT.
SO FOR EXAMPLE, WE CAN&apos;T FORGET
THE USE OF EXCLUSIVELY BLACK
PEOPLE AS TARGET PRACTICE IN
THE FARMINGTON HILLS POLICE
DEPARTMENT THAT CAME TO LIGHT
JUST A COUPLE OF MONTHS AGO.
THEN THEY STATION POINTED TO
THE DESPERATE NEED FOR BOTH
DEPARTMENTAL AND LEGISLATIVE
POLICIES TO PROHIBIT PEOPLE WHO
ENGAGE IN RACIST CONDUCT TO
JOIN THE POLICE DEPARTMENT OR
TO REMAIN ON THE POLICE
DEPARTMENT.
PLEASE UNDERSTAND THAT OUR VICE
CHAIR STEPHANIE CUTTER WILL BE
WORKING DILIGENTLY ON THIS
ISSUE IN THE COMING MONTHS.
&gt;&gt; SO THE NEW CHAIR OF THE
INDEPENDENT COMMUNITY POLICE
OVERSIGHT COMMISSION FRANCES TO
DO OUR HIRING IS A FOUNDING
MEMBER OF THIS COMMISSION.
SHE ALSO HAS SIGNIFICANT
EXPERIENCE IN COMMUNITY
DEVELOPMENT AND KNOWS AN HOUR
INSIDE AND OUT FROM HER YEARS
IN THE FORMER MAYOR&apos;S OFFICE
AND AS AN EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR
OF THE STATE STREET DISTRICT
WITH HER AT THE HELM.
IT IS CERTAINLY IN GOOD HANDS
AND I TURN IT OVER TO HER NOW.
&gt;&gt; THANK YOU.
GOOD EVENING.
THANK YOU FOR THAT INTRODUCTION
LISA.
TONIGHT I&apos;D LIKE TO SPEAK ABOUT
THE UPCOMING UNARMED EMERGENCY
RESPONSE UNIT AND THE WAYS IN
WHICH WORK TOWARDS THAT PROJECT
IS BEING HANDLED.
THE COMMISSION SPENT A
CONSIDERABLE AMOUNT OF TIME
DISCUSSING US AT OUR MOST
RECENT MEETING ON OUR RESPONSE
PROGRAMS ARE VITAL NOT JUST
BECAUSE THEY INCREASE THE
NUMBER OF PEOPLE WHO FEEL
COMFORTABLE ACCESSING PUBLIC
SAFETY SERVICES BUT ALSO
SPECIFICALLY BECAUSE THEY
EXPAND PUBLIC SAFETY SERVICES
FOR HISTORICALLY
DISENFRANCHIZED GROUPS.
THE CITY RECENTLY ACCEPTED A
BID FOR NEARLY ONE HUNDRED
THOUSAND DOLLARS FROM LANSING
BASED CONSULTING FIRM SC TO
STUDY COMMUNITY ATTITUDES
REGARDING THE UPCOMING UNARMED
EMERGENCY RESPONSE UNIT.
UNFORTUNATELY, THE SURVEY
PROCESS THUS FAR HAS BEEN
INCREDIBLY DISAPPOINTING AND
INSPIRES LITTLE CONFIDENCE IN
THAT THE DISENFRANCHIZED VOICES
WE&apos;RE SPECIFICALLY LOOKING TO
PROTECT WILL EVEN BE
REPRESENTED IN THE DATA THE
CITY WILL USE TO DETERMINE THE
PARAMETERS OF THE PROGRAM
INCLUDING THE CITY COUNCIL
PACKET.
THIS EVENING IS A COMMUNICATION
FROM MYCOCK REGARDING OUR
CONCERNS ABOUT THE COMMUNITY
ENGAGEMENT PROCESS.
THUS FAR THOUGH TRUST ALL
OF YOU WHO HAVE READ IT
THOROUGHLY.
I&apos;D LIKE TO GO THROUGH THAT
COMMUNICATION FOR THE BENEFIT
OF THE COMMUNITY SINCE THE CITY
RESOLUTION TWENTY ONE 06 ONE TO
GIVE DIRECTED THE CITY
ADMINISTRATOR TO WORK IN
CONSULTATION WITH THE
INDEPENDENT COMMUNITY POLICE
OVERSIGHT COMMISSION IN THE
PROCESS OF EXPLORING AN UNARMED
RESPONSE PROGRAM.
IT ASKED THAT THE CITY DO
SIGNIFICANT COMMUNITY OUTREACH
OF INDIVIDUALS MOST LIKELY TO
BENEFIT FROM AN ORGANIZED
RESPONSE PROGRAM BEFORE
DETERMINING THE STRUCTURE
OF SUCH A PROGRAM AFTER
COMMISSION AFTER THE COMMISSION
WAS INFORMED THAT THE CITY
WOULD NOT UNDERTAKE SUCH
IN-DEPTH OUTREACH, THE CITY
DECIDED TO SOLICIT PROPOSALS TO
CONDUCT THAT WORK.
AND ON JUNE 15TH PUBLIC SECTOR
CONSULTING PSC WAS CONTRACT FOR
NINETY NINE THOUSAND NINE
HUNDRED EIGHTEEN DOLLARS TO DO
COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT.
HOWEVER, HOWEVER, AFTER A
NUMBER OF INTERACTIONS WITH PSC
,OUR COMMISSION HAS GRAVE
CONCERNS ABOUT THE OUTREACH
PROCESS IN CONVERSATIONS WITH
PSC IT HAS BECOME CLEAR THAT
THEY DO NOT INTEND TO OUTREACH
OR HAVE DIRECT CONTACT WITH
THOSE MOST IN NEED OF AN
UNARMED RESPONSE PROGRAM.
THESE PEOPLE INCLUDE THOSE WHO
ARE ON HOUSE, PEOPLE WHO HAVE
EXPERIENCED BEHAVIORAL OR
MENTAL HEALTH CRISIS LGBTQ
INDIVIDUALS AND IMMIGRANTS,
PEOPLE WITHOUT IMMIGRATION
DOCUMENTATION OR THOSE FROM
MIXED STATUS IMMIGRATION
FAMILIES COLLEGE STUDENTS, HIGH
SCHOOL STUDENTS, SEX WORKERS
THOSE WHO WERE CRIMINALIZED FOR
THEIR SUBSTANCE USE, PEOPLE WHO
ARE OVERPOLICED WHETHER IN
NEIGHBORHOODS OR ON PUBLIC
TRANSIT AND THOSE WITH PREVIOUS
CONTACT WITH THE CRIMINAL LEGAL
SYSTEM, THOSE WHO ARE ASSET
LIMITED INCOME CONSTRAINED AND
EMPLOYED THOSE IN POVERTY
MARGINALIZED BLACK AND BROWN
PEOPLE IN ALL GROUPS
HISTORICALLY EXCLUDED FROM
PARTICIPATING IN THE
DEVELOPMENT OF PROGRAMS THAT
IMPACT THEM.
POLICY IS NOT LOCATED IN ANN
ARBOR AND HAS NO LOCAL
CONNECTIONS TO THE CITY.
MAYBE THAT&apos;S WHY THEY HAD NOT
DONE OUTREACH TO THE LIBRARY
OVERALL DOWNTOWN COMMUNITY
WHICH INCLUDES BUSINESSES,
CHURCHES AND ENTERTAINMENT
VENUES WHO ALL HAVE A VESTED
INTEREST IN THIS KIND OF PUBLIC
SAFETY SUPPORT.
SO FAR THEIR SOLE INSTRUMENT IS
AN ONLINE SURVEY WHICH IS ONLY
ACCESSIBLE TO THOSE PRIVILEGED
ENOUGH TO HAVE A COMPUTER AND
INTERNET ACCESS AND ARMED
RESPONSE PROGRAM IS FAIRLY
INNOVATIVE.
SO WE ASK WE ASK FOR WHAT WE
ASK FOR WAS A DEEP ENGAGEMENT
OF PEOPLE WHO HAVE BEEN
HISTORICALLY DISENFRANCHIZED
AND LEFT OUT OF THE DECISION
MAKING PROCESS.
IT IS NOT ACCEPTABLE FOR THE
CITY AND PSC TO SIMPLY SURVEY
THE SAME PEOPLE WHO ALWAYS
PARTICIPATE BECAUSE THEY HAVE
ALLOWED THE LUXURY OF TIME TO
PARTICIPATE AND A BUSINESS AS
USUAL ONLINE PROCESS.
IT IS CRITICAL THAT UNARMED
RESPONSE PLAN B ARE DESIGNED
WITH COMMUNITY MEMBERS AND NOT
FOR THEM BY PEOPLE WITH NO
CONTEXT OF SITUATIONS THAT
MIGHT LEAD ONE TO PREFER AN
UNARMED RESPONSE REQUEST THAT
THOSE MOST LIKELY TO BE
IMPACTED BY AN UNARMED RESPONSE
PROGRAM BE PRIORITIZED IN
OUTREACH.
WE FURTHER REQUEST THAT PSC
MUST INCLUDE OUTREACH TO AND
PARTICIPATION OF DISINFO
FRANCHISED AND UNDERSERVED
POPULATIONS IN ORDER TO FULFILL
THEIR CONTRACT TO THE CITY.
WE ALSO REQUEST THAT PSC BE
CONTACTED AS SOON AS POSSIBLE
AND THAT THE CITY DETERMINE HOW
THEY PLAN TO ACCOMPLISH THE
GOAL OF COMMUNITY OUTREACH AS
OUTLINED HERE.
WE ALSO REQUEST TO SEE THE RAW
DATA COLLECTED BY PSC LAST WE
REQUESTED THE CITY
ADMINISTRATION REPORT BACK TO A
PARK AS SOON AS THEY GET
FEEDBACK FROM PSC REGARDING HOW
THEY WILL ACCOMPLISH ITS
OUTREACH IN ADDITION TO THE
CONCERNED OUTLINED IN OUR
STATEMENT IN THE CITY COUNCIL
PACKET I&apos;D TO DIRECTLY ADDRESS
FRANKLY HOW UNPROFESSIONAL AND
OUT OF TOUCH THE SURVEY ITSELF
IS IN A SURVEY UNARMED
RESPONSE.
THERE IS NO MENTION OF WHAT
UNARMED RESPONSE PROGRAMS EVEN
ARE.
THE VERY FIRST QUESTION OF THIS
SURVEY ASKS WHETHER OR NOT THE
RESPONDENTS SUPPORT SOMETHING
FOR WHICH THEY HAVE NOT BEEN
GIVEN ANY CONTEXT OR
DEFINITION.
IT GOES ON TO ASK WHAT
THE
GOALS OF SUCH A PROGRAM SHOULD
BE WITHOUT SOLICITING ANY
INFORMATION ABOUT SUCH PROGRAMS
SHOULD LOOK LIKE WHERE THE
KINDS OF SITUATIONS IN WHICH
THE RESPONDENT MIGHT CONSIDER
USING IT IF IT WERE AVAILABLE.
THE LAST HALF OF THE SURVEY IS
DEDICATED TO ASCERTAINING
DEMOGRAPHIC INFORMATION ABOUT
THE RESPONDENT INCLUDING NOT
THEIR AGE AND ETHNICITY BUT
ALSO HOW MUCH MONEY AND IF THEY
HAVE A CRIMINAL RECORD MIND DO
THIS SURVEY ASKED NOT JUST IF
THEY CAN MAKE THE INFORMATION
PUBLIC BUT IF THEY CAN DO SO
ATTACHED WITH THE PERSON&apos;S NAME
AND THEIR RESPONSIVENESS.
AND THIS QUESTION IS AT THE
BEGINNING OF THIS SURVEY NOT AT
THE END WHERE THEY&apos;RE ANSWERING
DEMOGRAPHIC QUESTIONS.
&gt;&gt; IT IS HARD TO FEEL THAT THIS
PROCESS IS GOING TO YIELD
HONEST REPRESENTATION AND
FEEDBACK FROM OUR COMMUNITY
WHEN IT FAILS TO UNDERSTAND THE
LIVED EXPERIENCES OF THE PEOPLE
WITHIN IT.
IF SUCH FUNDAMENTAL ERRORS ARE
MADE IN THE CONSTRUCTION AND
DEPLOYING OF SOMETHIN&apos;S OR
SIMPLE AS AN ONLINE SURVEY AND
THAT BEGS THE QUESTION IF
ERRORS ARE BEING MADE ON
SOMETHING AS SIMPLE, HOW ARE WE
SUPPOSED TO FEEL CONFIDENT THAT
THE PLANNED FOCUS GROUPS THAT
ARE GOING TO BE CONDUCTED IN A
WAY THAT REPRESENT THE
DISENFRANCHIZED THE COMMUNITY
IS FOUGHT SO HARD FOR NOT ARMED
RESPONSE PROGRAM BECAUSE IT&apos;S
BELIEVED SERVING THOSE WHO
OFTEN DON&apos;T HAVE A VOICE IT
WOULD BE A HUGE DISSERVICE TO
ANYONE WHO HAS PARTICIPATED IN
THIS PROCESS FOR THAT WORK TO
BE UNDONE DUE TO WHAT CAN ONLY
BE VIEWED AS AN INSUFFICIENT
FEEDBACK IF YOU ARE SOMEONE WHO
HAS EVER FELT AFRAID TO CALL
THE POLICE BECAUSE YOU THOUGHT
OF SOMEONE&apos;S MENTAL HEALTH
CRISIS WOULD BE CRIMINALIZED OR
IF YOU SEE SOMEONE OVERDOSING
AND QUESTIONED WHETHER OR NOT
YOU SHOULD CALL 911 BECAUSE YOU
DON&apos;T WANT THEM TO BE ARRESTED
FOR DRUG POSSESSION IF YOU ARE
A PARENT WHO HAS EVER NEEDED
HELP BECAUSE YOUR CHILD IS ON
THE SPECTRUM WAS HAVING A
MELTDOWN, DO NOT WANT TO CALL
THE POLICE FOR ASSISTANCE.
YOUR VOICE MATTERS IF YOU FEEL
COMFORTABLE FILLING OUT THE
SURVEY, PLEASE TELL US ABOUT
SITUATIONS IN WHICH WHICH YOU
FEEL YOU CAN HAVE BENEFITED
FROM HAVING ACCESS TO AN
UNARMED RESPONSE UNIT AND IF
YOU UNDERSTANDABLY DON&apos;T FEEL
COMFORTABLE DOING THAT, WE
STILL WOULD LOVE TO HEAR FROM
YOU OR IF YOU QUESTIONS ABOUT
ONE ARMED UNARMED RESPONSE IS
AND HOW OUR COMMUNITY CAN
BENEFIT FROM US, PLEASE CONTACT
US.
YOU CAN EMAIL OUR COMMISSION AT
ISC PEOC AT EIGHT TO GREG OR
TWEET US AT EIGHT TO EPOXI ON
TWITTER.
&gt;&gt; THANK YOU.
WELCOME TO PUBLIC COMMENT
RESERVED TIME PUBLIC RESERVE
TIME AN OPPORTUNITY FOR MEMBERS
OF THE PUBLIC TO SPEAK TO
COUNCIL THE COMMUNITY ABOUT
MATTERS OF MUNICIPAL INTEREST
TO SPEAK IN PUBLIC COMMENT
RESERVE TIME ONE NEEDS TO HAVE
SIGNED UP IN ADVANCE BY
CONTACTING OUR CITY CLERK
SPEAKERS BOTH HERE AND ONLINE
LEFT HAVE THREE MINUTES IN
WHICH TO SPEAK SO PLEASE PAY
CLOSE ATTENTION TO AT A TIME
OUR CLERK WILL NOTIFY YOU IN
THIRTY SECONDS REMAINING AND
WHEN YOUR TIME HAS EXPIRED WHEN
YOUR TIME HAS EXPIRED PLEASE
CONCLUDE YOUR REMARKS AND CEDE
THE FLOOR.
&gt;&gt; OUR FIRST SPEAKER TODAY IS
RALPH MCKIE.
GOOD EVENING.
MY NAMES ARE MICKEY.
&gt;&gt; I LIVE IN THE FIFTH WARD.
MY COMMENTS ON CHIESI ONE ARE
HOPEFULLY DIRECTED TO THE
PUBLIC AS WELL AS TO THIS BODY.
I LEARNED LAST WEEK I DID A
PRESENTATION OR HELPED WITH ONE
A CITIZENS MEETING ON THIS
TOPIC AT WESTGATE LIBRARY SOON
AFTERWARDS I WAS ACCUSED BY A
COUPLE OF MEMBERS OF THIS BODY
OF SPREADING DISINFORMATION AND
BEING ANTI HOUSING AT LEAST
THAT WAS SUPPORTERS VIEW AND AS
FEAR MONGERING I SAID AT THAT
MEETING THAT I WAS IN FAVOR
OF DENSE HOUSING ON EVERY
VACANT SITE IN THAT CORRIDOR.
THAT&apos;S NOT A. HOUSING.
I THEN SAID THAT I THOUGHT THIS
PROCESS SHOULD HAVE STARTED BY
QUICKLY BANNING ALL UNDESIRED
USES THEN MEETING WITH THE
OWNERS OF THE VACANT SITES AND
TRY TO GET THOSE OWNERS TO IT
TO CREATE NEW HOUSING.
&gt;&gt; BEYOND THAT THOUGH, EVERY
SINGLE THERE&apos;S TEN VACANT SITES
ROUGHLY A COUPLE OF THEM ARE
LARGE.
MOST OF THEM ARE SMALL.
BEYOND THAT EVERY SINGLE
PROPERTY WILL THAT IS A NEW
DEVELOPMENT WILL DISPLACE
EXISTING BUSINESS.
HOW WOULD THAT INDUCEMENT
HAPPEN?
&gt;&gt; THE ONE WOULD RAISE SOME
HEIGHT LIMITS AND WOULD MORE
IMPORTANTLY RATE CHANGE THE
FLOOR AREA RATIO IN ORDER TO IN
THE TYPICAL CASE ALLOW DOUBLE
THE SQUARE FOOTAGE ALLOWED.
NOW UP TO SEVEN TIMES.
&gt;&gt; THOSE ARE PRETTY BIG
INDUCEMENTS.
&gt;&gt; THE PLANNING COMMISSION
REFUSED TO DO A SUMMARY OF THE
CURRENT HEIGHT LIMITS AND WHAT
THEY WOULD CHANGE TO CITIZENS
THEN THERE ARE SIXTY SIX
PARCELS APPROXIMATELY IT WOULD
BE ONE TWENTY FEET OR HIGHER
ONE HUNDRED THAT WOULD BE
SEVENTY FIVE OR HIGHER.
&gt;&gt; THE COUNCIL MEMBER NELSON
ASKED FOR A LIST OF THE NON
CONFORMING STRUCTURES.
&gt;&gt; THE STAFF DIDN&apos;T ANSWER THAT
QUESTION IN DADGE.
IN MY VIEW VIRTUALLY ALL
OF THOSE STRUCTURES WOULD BE
NONCONFORMING.
I CHALLENGE STAFF TO GIVE ME
FIVE THAT WOULD CONFORM TO THE
DC ONE SO THAT MEANS THAT EVERY
SINGLE ADDITION OR EXPANSION
OF A BUSINESS WOULD HAVE TO GO
TO THE ZIBA FOR A VARIANCE.
I READ THE ZIBA STANDARDS TODAY
.
ONE OF THEM IS IT&apos;S GOT TO BE
SUBSTANTIALLY MORE THAN JUST
GETTING A BETTER FINANCIAL
RETURN AND ANOTHER IS THAT IT
HAS TO BE THE MINIMUM VARIANCE
THAT ALLOWS A REASONABLE USE
OF THE PROPERTY.
A SUCCESSFUL BUSINESS
PRESUMABLY HAS A REASONABLE USE
OF THE PROPERTY RIGHT NOW.
I THINK THOSE ARE STRICT
STANDARDS AND AS A AS A LAWYER
LOOKING AT THAT, I THINK GOING
TO THE ZUBA IS A CRAPSHOOT.
THIS AFFECTS EVERY SINGLE
BUSINESS IN THAT QUARTER THAT
EXISTS NOW THOSE I THINK
THERE&apos;S ALSO A SAFETY ISSUE
THAT DIDN&apos;T COME UP UNTIL THE
THE CPC VOTE.
&gt;&gt; I&apos;M NOT SURE THAT I&apos;M NOT
SURE IF YOU THINK THAT SHOULD
BE SOLVED EITHER YOUR GOALS YOU
SAY THIS SHOULD THIS WILL HELP
GET RID OF THE VAST PARKING
LOTS.
IT WON&apos;T THOSE PARKING LOTS
WILL STILL BE THERE OR THE
STORES WON&apos;T YOU SAY IT WOULD
HELP THIS TO ACHIEVE AN URBAN
STREETSCAPE?
IT WON&apos;T.
IT WILL BE A HODGEPODGE.
&gt;&gt; THERE&apos;S A LOT MORE I&apos;D LIKE
TO SAY BUT I THINK MY TIME IS
ABOUT UP.
THANK THANK YOU.
OUR NEXT SPEAKER IS JIM HYC
.
OH LET&apos;S SEE.
&gt;&gt; I I&apos;M HERE TO SUPPORT FOR
THE MAPLE STADIUM REZONING TO
THE NEW BUT LONG ISLAND TO SEE
ONE ZONING CODE .
WHILE IT IS POSSIBLE THAT ONE
REZONING MAY NOT ULTIMATELY
HAVE THE BEST CASE EFFECT
OF RAPIDLY CREATING MORE
WALKABLE AND VIABLE AREA FULL
OF MID RISE BUILDINGS WITH
STREET LEVEL RETAIL BELOW
SEVERAL FLOORS OF MULTIFAMILY
HOUSING THE VERY LEAST WE CAN
DEFINITELY EXPECT FROM IT IS
THAT AS FORMER PLANNING
COMMISSION MEMBERS CAPTURED I
RECENTLY WROTE QUOTE WHAT DC
ONE DOES DO IS MAKE IT HARDER
FOR PROPERTY OWNERS IN THE
ZONED AREA TO DO ANY
SUBSTANTIAL REDEVELOPMENT THAT
MAINTAINS THEIR PROPERTY AS A
SUBURBAN STYLE STRIP MALL END
OF QUOTE.
IN FACT, IT IS REASONABLE TO
ASSUME THAT NEW YORK CITY BASED
NATIONAL STRIP MALL DEVELOPER
AND OWNER BRICKS MORE HAS
REGISTERED ITS DISPLEASURE WITH
THE REZONING BECAUSE THEY RUN
STRIP MALLS AND THEY ARE NOT
INTERESTED IN THEIR PROPERTY IN
ANN BEING REPURPOSED FOR STRIP
MALLS THAT ALSO INCLUDE
HOUSING, IT IS NOT IN THEIR
BUSINESS MODEL TO INCLUDE
HOUSING IN THEIR STRIP MALLS
AND THEY WANT TO KEEP IMPOSING
THEIR BUSINESS MODEL ONTO OUR
COMMUNITY REGARDLESS OF WHAT WE
WANT IN OUR COMMUNITY SINCE WE
NEED MORE HOUSING HERE WHENEVER
I LIKE THEM AND OTHER PROPERTY
OWNERS TO BE PUSHED A LITTLE
CLOSER TO SERVING OUR
INCREASING NEEDS FOR HOUSING
REZONING TO TAKE ONE DOES THIS
STRIP MALLS FULL OF PROPER
PROFITABLE BUSINESSES ARE NOT
GOING TO GO AWAY IF WE NEED IF
WE GET NOTHING ELSE FROM DC ONE
IN THE AREAS WHERE IT IS
APPLIED AT LEAST WE GET MORE
BUILDING OPTIONS THAN STRIP
MALLS THAT CAN ONLY BE
REDEVELOPED INTO DIFFERENTLY
CONFIGURED STRIP MALLS EVEN
JUST THAT MUCH MORE EVEN JUST
THAT MUCH IS MORE GOOD ENOUGH
FOR ME THAT MAYBE WE ALSO GET
SOME OTHER THINGS INCLUDING NEW
HOUSING WITHOUT ANY HOUSING
DISPLACEMENT RETAILER AND
RESTAURANTS THAT BECOME
NEIGHBORHOOD BUSINESSES BECAUSE
NEIGHBORHOODS ARE BUILT UP
AROUND THE EXISTING LOCATIONS
THOSE OF THOSE BUSINESSES
INCREASING INCREASED
WALKABILITY AND FLEXIBILITY IN
THE ZONED AREAS, INCREASED BUS
RIDERSHIP SYNERGISTICALLY
HELPED BY THE REVENUE FROM THE
RECENTLY APPROVED TRANSIT
MILEAGE AND DECREASED VEHICLE
MILES TRAVELED WITHIN THE CITY
BECAUSE MORE PEOPLE CAN LIVE
CLOSER TO RETAILERS AND
RESTAURANTS.
THE FIRST STEP TOWARD GETTING
ANY OF THIS IS APPROVING THE
APPLICATION OF ONE TO MORE
PARCELS OF LAND AND I LOOK
FORWARD TO SEEING IT APPROVED
IN THE CURRENTLY PROPOSED AREA
AROUND APRIL AND STADIUM.
&gt;&gt; THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
OUR NEXT
SPEAKER IS ERIC LIPSON
.
ERIC LIPSON IS BOOGIE&apos;S LIPSON
ONLINE THAT YOU&apos;RE I ASSURE
THAT HE WAS SUPPOSED TO BE IN
PERSON PERHAPS IF HE CALLS
YOU&apos;LL LET ME KNOW.
OUR NEXT SPEAKER IS ROBERT
GEORGE
.
THANK YOU, MR. CHAIRMAN,
MEMBERS OF COUNCIL FOR
AFFORDING ME THIS OPPORTUNITY
TO SPEAK IN FAVOR OR EXCUSE ME
TO SPEAK IN OPPOSITION TO
AGENDA ITEM DC THREE WHICH
PERTAINS TO THE NATURE OF HOW
LOCAL MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS WOULD
BE STRUCTURED.
MY NAME IS ROBERT GEORGE AND
I&apos;M A MEMBER OF LABOR&apos;S LOCAL
FOR NINE NINE AND A TRUSTEE AND
HURON VALLEY AREA LABOR
FEDERATION EXECUTIVE.
ADDITIONALLY, I AM A RESIDENT
OF AN ARBOR&apos;S THIRD WARD.
I COME BY FOR THE COUNCIL TO MY
OPPOSITION TO AGENDA ITEM DC
THREE WHICH WOULD MOVE OUR
LOCAL MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS FROM
BEING PARTIZAN ELECTIONS TO
NONPARTIZAN ELECTIONS.
LOCAL ORGANIZED LABOR HAS
REPEATEDLY OPPOSED SUCH MOVES
IN THE PAST AND OUR POSITION IN
OPPOSITION TO NON CITY
ELECTIONS REMAINS STEADFAST.
I WOULD LIKE TO PARAPHRASE SOME
POINTS ON THE NATIONAL LEAGUE
OF CITIES.
PROPONENTS FOR PARTIZAN
ELECTIONS ARGUE THAT THAT THE
ABSENCE OF PARTY LABELS CAN
CONFUSE VOTERS AND PREVENTS
THEM FROM HAVING A KNOWLEDGE
BASE OF A CANDIDATE&apos;S
IDEOLOGICAL POSITIONS AND THE
ABSENCE OF A PARTY VOTERS CAN
TURN TO WHATEVER CUE IS
AVAILABLE TO THEM WHICH CAN
RESULT IN A VOTER USING A
CANDIDATE&apos;S ETHNICITY OR GENDER
AS A DECIDING FACTOR IN A VOTE
NONPARTIZAN ELECTIONS TEND TO
PRODUCE ELECTED OFFICIALS MORE
REPRESENTATIVE OF THE UPPER
SOCIOECONOMIC CLASSES THAN THE
GENERAL POPULACE AND AGGRAVATES
THE BIAS AND VOTER TURNOUT.
ADDITIONALLY, NONPARTIZAN
ELECTIONS IN ANN ARBOR WERE
EXTREMELY LOW TURNOUT AFFAIRS
IN THE PAST AT TIMES LESS THAN
10 PERCENT OF ALL VOTERS VOTING
IN THESE ELECTIONS.
THE STRUCTURE OFTEN BENEFITS
THOSE WITH MEANS AND ABILITY
AND IS NOT REPRESENTATIVE
OF THE CITY&apos;S PROGRESSIVE
VALUES.
BROADLY SPEAKING IN MICHIGAN
THE DEMOCRATIC PARTY HAS BEEN
THE PARTY OF ORGANIZED LABOR
FIGHTING FOR BETTER CONDITIONS
FOR WORKING PEOPLE FIGHTING FOR
EQUAL RIGHTS AND FIGHTING FOR A
JUST TRANSITION ARE ALL PARTS
OF THE LABOR MOVEMENT THAT
INTERTWINE WITH THE CURRENT
MICHIGAN DEMOCRATIC PARTY AS A
CITY THAT IS HEAVILY DEMOCRATIC
AND A PROGRESSIVE BASTION FOR
THE STATE, WE SHOULD TAKE PRIDE
THAT OUR CURRENT CITY COUNCIL
MEMBERS WERE ALL ELECTED AS
DEMOCRATS.
THERE SHOULD BE A POINT
OF EXCITEMENT, NOT A POINT
OF SHAME.
CHANGES TO OUR ELECTIONS ARE
NEEDED TO ENSURE MAXIMUM ACCESS
ESPECIALLY FOR STUDENTS.
BUT THAT IS BUT IT IS IMPORTANT
THAT WE MAINTAIN A CITY COUNCIL
TH IS PROGRESSIVE AND HAVING
PARTIES AND MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS
CAN HELP GUARANTEE THAT.
ADDITIONALLY, I WOULD LIKE TO
STATE ORGANIZED LABOR HAS BROAD
SUPPORT OF AGENDA ITEMS SEE ONE
THE ONE REZONING ORDINANCE IS
IMPORTANT TO ALL OF OUR MEMBERS
THAT ADDITIONAL HOUSING IS
BUILT, THAT REZONING ITSELF
WILL STIMULATE ECONOMIC GROWTH
CREATING NEW JOBS AND WILL
ALLOW NEW RESIDENTS TO MOVE
INTO OUR WONDERFUL CITY.
&gt;&gt; THANK YOU FOR YOUR TIME.
THANK YOU.
OUR NEXT SPEAKER IS PETER
ECKSTEIN
.
&gt;&gt; HELLO.
FIVE YEARS AGO I SPOKE TO
SUPPORT AN URGENT RESOLUTION ON
THE NEED TO BARRIERS ON THE
MIDDLE AND UPPER FLOORS OF CITY
PARKING STRUCTURES TO CHECK AN
ONGOING EPIDEMIC OF SUICIDES.
&gt;&gt; WE HAD NOT TREATED THIS WITH
SUFFICIENT URGENCY AND I
SUGGESTED INEXPENSIVE CHAIN
LINK FENCING AS A STOPGAP
MEASURE.
THE RESOLUTION URGED DDA TO
PLACE THE HIGHEST PRIORITY ON
PROVIDING SUCH TEMPORARY
BARRIERS IF PERMANENT
STRUCTURES ARE DELAYED FOR ANY
REASON AND THIS IS AN EXAMPLE
OF A MORE PERMANENT STRUCTURE
THAT WAS ADOPTED IN THE CITY
OF GRAND RAPIDS WHICH IS QUITE
A PROGRESSIVE CITY IN THIS
RESPECT.
&gt;&gt; THE RESOLUTION PASSED
UNANIMOUSLY AND AGREED WITHIN
SEVERAL WEEKS INSTALLATION
OF CHAIN LINK FENCING BEGAN AT
THE MOST DANGEROUS SPOT.
BUT BEFORE IT COULD EVEN BEGIN
THERE WAS YET ANOTHER SUICIDE
FROM A STRUCTURE THE MAN HAD
HAD AN ARGUMENT WITH HIS WIFE
GOTTEN DRUNK AND JUMPED BOTH
CURABLE SITUATIONS ONCE
INSTALLED, HOWEVER, THE ROOFTOP
FENCING PROVED EFFECTIVE FOR
SEVERAL YEARS.
&gt;&gt; BUT DDA DID NOT ADEQUATELY
SECURE ENOUGH OF THE WINDOWS
HAD ANOTHER STRUCTURE AND TWO
AND A HALF YEARS AGO A STUDENT
JUMPED TO HIS DEATH.
&gt;&gt; TO THIS DAY DED HAS THAT
ADDED ANY BARRIERS TO THE
WINDOWS AND THE FLOOR FROM
WHICH HE JUMPED.
NOR HAS IT INSTALLED ANY
PERMANENT BARRIERS ON ROOFTOPS
COVERING WINDOWS WITH WELL
ATTACHED CHAIN LINKING MAKES
THEM RELATIVELY SECURE BUT ON
ROOFTOPS THERE WAS ALWAYS THE
DANGER THAT SOMEONE MIGHT
BREACH OR CLIMB A CHAIN LINK
FENCE.
THAT DANGER WAS REALIZED SIX
DAYS AGO WHEN ANOTHER TROUBLED
PERSON JUMPED THAT OR THAT
FLOOR.
THE FLOOR THAT ENABLED THAT
TRAGEDY STILL HAS NOT AT LEAST
HAVE AS OF TWO DAYS AGO EVEN
BEEN PATCHED OVER.
SO PLEASE PASS THE PARKING
STRUCTURE RESOLUTION BEFORE YOU
BUT ALSO PLEASE ASK YOUR ASK MR
DE HONY TO FIND COMPETENT
SAFETY INSPECTORS TO SUPERVISE
THE IMMEDIATE FELLING OF THE
TWO KNOWN GAPS TO SURVEY ALL
THE CITY OWNED STRUCTURES FOR
WEAKNESSES AND TO RECOMMEND
BOTH TEMPORARY AND PERMANENT
BARRIERS.
OUR PROPERTY OUR PARKING
STRUCTURES SHOULD NEVER AGAIN
BE AVAILABLE AS PLATFORMS FOR
DEATH.
&gt;&gt; THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
&gt;&gt; OUR NEXT SPEAKER IS JONATHAN
LEVINE
, CALLER WITH THE PHONE
NUMBER FIVE OR SIX.
GO AHEAD.
THEY WILL BE ACCORDING TO PART
OF P.S. ONE BUILDING FOR THE
STADIUM AT MAPLE AREA FROM THE
IS ONE OF THE MEANS TO HELP THE
CITY TO ADDRESS SOME OF ITS
PRINCIPAL CHALLENGES, ITS
HOUSING SHORTAGE AND ITS
PARTICULARLY ITS HOUSING AND
TRANSPORTATION AND
SUSTAINABILITY.
THIS WORK IS LEAVING THE PEOPLE
THE OPPORTUNITY TO REDUCE DRAG
FOR HOUSING LIVING ON AN
WESTSIDE ABOUT SEVENTEEN
THOUSAND MILES PER YEAR THAT
COMPARES WITH ABOUT TWENTY FOUR
THOUSAND MILE MOVING TO L.A.
TOWNSHIP OR DEXTER ALONG WITH
THE FACT THAT WE HAVE ME
BECAUSE OF ITS SHARED
CONSTRUCTION WE&apos;RE ALSO
BUILDING ENERGY CONSUMED BY
ABOUT HALF BUILDING NEW
NEIGHBORS.
TANAGRA MEANS GIVING PEOPLE THE
OPPORTUNITY TO CHOOSE A
RELATIVELY LOW CARBON LOAN
COMPARED TO OTHER LOCATIONS
THEY MIGHT CHOOSE IF THEY WERE
NOT ACCOMMODATED HERE AND HAD
BUILDINGS AND TRANSPORTATION
ACCOMMODATION ACCOUNT FOR
ALMOST 60 PERCENT OF US
GREENHOUSE GAS MISSION
IMPOSSIBLE TO REACH OUR
SUSTAINABILITY GOALS WITHOUT
THIS KIND OF ATTENTION TO THESE
TWO SECTORS AND THE ONE AREA
LOCATION FOR TRYING TO SUPPORT
OF KNOW THE 11 MINUTES FROM
DOWNTOWN BY BUS WHICH OFFERS
FREQUENT SERVICE AND MAKE A
CONSIDERABLE INVESTMENT IN
THEIR BUS SYSTEM AND TRANSIT
SUPPORT VOTING TO MAKE SURE
THAT THEY GET THEIR MONEY&apos;S
WORTH.
&gt;&gt; I BUSINESSES IN THE AREA
BUSINESSES THRIVE ON CUSTOMERS
AND GIVING MANY PEOPLE THE
OPPORTUNITY TO LIVE CLOSE TO
SHOPPING WILL INCREASE THE
RANGE OF OPPORTUNITIES
AVAILABLE AND LACKS WALKABLE
NEIGHBORHOOD RETAIL AND I DON&apos;T
GO IS A BIG PART OF THE REASON
WHY MANDATE MANDATING PARKING
AS WE DO IT IS JUST THAT IT&apos;S A
RECIPE FOR A MANDATED PARKING
AND THEY ARE DOMINATED
LANDSCAPE THAT IT CREATES
OPPORTUNITY IN ORDER TO BE THAT
IS THE RECIPE FOR PRESERVING
AFFORDABLE HOUSING AVAILABLE
FOR ABOUT THE STANDARD
DEVIATION OF THE DC ONE.
I DISAGREE WITH THE ASSESSMENT
FOR TWO REASONS.
FIRST OF ALL THE DC ONE
DESIGNED TO BE A SELF ADJUSTING
THOUGH ITS MAXIMUM HEIGHT
VARIED WITH THE DISTANCE FROM
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT AND IT HAD
BEEN A PACIFIC STANDARD BASED
ON THE WIDTH OF THE LOT THAT
THIS EXPRESSION WILL VARY FROM
CONTEXT TO CONTEXT IN WHICH
IT&apos;S DEPLOYED.
THIRTY THREE STANDARD IT SHOULD
BE PRETTY GOOD DESCRIPTOR
OF THE PROBLEMS WITH POSTWAR
AUTO ORIENTED PARKING HEAVY
VEHICLE.
THAT&apos;S WHY SO MANY PLACES LOOK
LIKE SO MANY OTHER PLACES.
&gt;&gt; THEY TRANSFORM THESE PLACES
OVERNIGHT BUT IT&apos;S A NECESSARY
STEP TOWARDS THE PEDESTRIANS,
CYCLISTS AND TRANSIT USER
FRIENDLY AREA AND WE REPEATED
PLANNING POLICIES AND THE TWO
MOST RECENT ELECTIONS HAVE
SHOWN THAT WHAT THEY WANT.
&gt;&gt; THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
OUR NEXT SPEAKER IS TOM
STOLLBERG
TOM STALBERG NUMBER
FIVE THREE FOUR ON YOUR PHONE.
GO AHEAD.
HELLO.
THIS IS STOLLBERG CALLING FROM
LOWERTOWN TOWN IN ANN ARBOR
LATER TONIGHT I WILL RECOMMEND
THAT YOU SUPPORT TENANTS IN ANN
ARBOR HAVING THE RIGHT TO RENEW
THE AMENDMENT TO THE HYPERCOLOR
BY VOTING TO ALLOW THE
POSSIBILITY OF NONPARTIZAN
ELECTION BECAUSE MANY OF THE
TENANTS ARE DISENFRANCHIZED BY
THE CURRENT SYSTEM THAT YOU
MUST HAVE.
I SEE ONE WHICH IS A VERY
PROBLEMATIC CITY INITIATED MASS
REZONING OF ABOUT 200 PER
ZONING CATEGORY THAT IS BEING
BACKED INTO A ONE SIZE FITS ALL
CITYWIDE SOLUTION.
&gt;&gt; THE SENATE RULES COURTICE
ONE IF NOT THIS PART OF TOWN
VERY WELL.
THE ISSUES WERE BROUGHT UP IN
MEETINGS WITH CITIZENS.
THE PLANNING STAFF LISTEN TO
WHAT PEOPLE HAD TO SAY AND IN A
VERY GOOD REPORT DENHA JUNE
TWENTY EIGHT CAME UP WITH
POSSIBLE SOLUTIONS TO BE
BRAINSTORMERS.
BUT A SUBCOMMITTEE OF THE
PLANNING COMMISSION SHUT THEM
ALL DOWN.
WHY CAN&apos;T WE HAVE A SOLUTION
THAT MEETS THE SPECIFIC NEEDS
OF PUTTING AND MEIKLE BECAUSE
IT CHANGES THE FCC ONE NOW
WOULD HAVE TO APPLY TO THE
SANDY PROPERTIES OF THE CITY,
ARGUED MATTHEWS.
DON&apos;T WANT TO BE NARROWER.
LET ME REPEAT THAT THE CAT
TWENTYSIX ONE NOW TO FIFTEEN
MAPLE BECAUSE WE WOULD HAVE TO
APPLY TO MANY PARTICLES THAT
WERE JUST MASS.
WE DON&apos;T IT&apos;S BEEN EVEN HOUR
WHICH IS VERY DIFFERENT
CHARACTERISTICS AND ISSUES THAT
COULD AND PROBABLY SHOULD
CREATE ANOTHER ZONE A CATEGORY
CALLED EASY TO WORK BETTER FOR
STADIUM MORE MAPLE THAN TO SEE
WHAT WILL WANT.
THEY DO THAT BECAUSE IN A RUSH
TO GET IT WRONG, COMMISSION
JUST DIDN&apos;T WANT TO TAKE THE
TIME TO DO THAT.
&gt;&gt; IT PUT A SQUARE PEG IN THE
ROUND HOLE AND THAT&apos;S ONE RULE
APPLY HERE IF YOU HAVE TO VOTE
FOR THAT IT&apos;S HIGHLY LIKELY
THAT THIS IS WHAT WILL HAPPEN
FOR WASHTENAW TWO AND THEN
S.E.C ONE WILL BE EASIER AND
FOR PACARD SO ON A ONE SIZE
FITS ALL THE CATEGORY THAT IS
CREATED FOR LOOKING AT THE
PICTURE OF EACH AREA AND THE
THESE AND THE ONE OF THE
CITIZENS AND THOSE DIFFERENT
AREAS YOU THINK ABOUT THAT
FIRST THING YOU REFER TO A
DETAIL PLAN WHEN YOU CODIFY THE
DETAIL PLAN INTO FORCEFULLY
AWAY WHICH IS ONLY CODE THAT IS
THE INTENT OF THE MICHIGAN
ZONING ENABLING IT AND WE ARE
NOT DOING THAT RIGHT HERE.
AS A LONG TIME PROPONENT
OF TRANSIT ORIENTED
DEVELOPMENT, I WAS DISAPPOINTED
IN THE PLAN THAT WE HAVE BEFORE
US.
THE PROPOSAL ISN&apos;T LIKELY TO
GIVE US WHAT IS BEING TOUTED BY
ITS PROPONENTS AND CHEERLEADERS
.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN SHOULD BE
PROVIDED FOR EACH OF THE AREAS
INDIVIDUALLY OR CITYWIDE
PROPOSAL SHOULD IDENTIFY THE
ELIGIBLE SO THAT WE CAN BE
REZONED AS PROPERTY OWNERS AND
DEVELOPERS BRING IN NEW
PROPOSALS THAT WILL BE BETWEEN
CITY THREE AS WE SEE HOW THIS
DEVELOPS IT ALSO ALLOWS US THE
OPPORTUNITY TO TAKE ADVANTAGE.
THANK YOU.
OUR NEXT SPEAKER IS JAMES MOORE
.
WHAT&apos;S YOUR NAME OR PHONE
NUMBER FOR ONE ONE?
GO AHEAD CRESTAR SIX ON YOUR
PHONE.
&gt;&gt; GO GO AHEAD.
YES WE CAN.
THANK YOU.
THIS INCREASED SECURITY NUMBER
COMMISSIONER FOR THE CITY
OF WANT OUR CONVERSATIONS IT
LIKE A PROMISING TO THE CENTRAL
DISCUSSION TONIGHT SUCH RAPID
LIBRARY TO BE FORMER NAVY
STREAMING FROM THE COLD WAR
ENCOURAGE SUPPORT.
WE ON TO USE THE THIS AND SHE&apos;S
USEFUL TO SUPPORT SERVICES.
WELCOME TO YOUR HOME CHARLES.
&gt;&gt; WE ENERGY NEEDS.
&gt;&gt; I THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
DR. ANYMORE PEDESTRIAN&apos;S VERY
PROMISING.
LAST WEEK KEESEY ONE PUBLIC
ORDER FOR
AND PROTECTION FOR
NATURAL FEATURES BOTH FOR
PROTECTING GREEN SPACE
TECHNOLOGY AND THAT THIS
TRANSPORTER&apos;S
DISCUSSION A
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN ALSO
REQUIRED BY THIS
DISCUSSION
WILL FROM WHERE WE ARE AND THAT
WE BEGIN TO TRANSFER AGAIN TO
DISCUSSION AND PLAN NOW THAT I
REFERRED TO LAST WEEK&apos;S MEETING
TO START THIS REMINDER THAT THE
MORE PEOPLE THAT YOU ARE AWARE
OF YOUR RESOURCES ABOUT SO I
NEED TO BE CAREFUL, KEEP YOUR
DISCUSSION.
I BE THAT FOR ONE MORE
ANYMORE
.
&gt;&gt; THANK YOU.
OUR NEXT SPEAKER IS ADAM
GOODMAN.
ADAM GOODMAN
, AL GOODMAN GET
CALLING IN FROM THE WEST SIDE
OF BANABA TONIGHT TO SAY THAT I
STRONGLY SUPPORT THE STADIUM
AND MAPLE YOU WHEN RETURNING WE
ARE READY FOR OR FACING CRISES
IN OUR CITY AND HOUSING CLIMATE
AND TRAFFIC VIOLENCE AND I WAS
RELATIVELY NEARBY TO THIS
CORRIDOR.
SO I WANT TO TALK TO YOU ABOUT
WHY I FEEL A SENSE OF URGENCY
TO GET THIS DONE PARTICULARLY
HERE AND TO ILLUSTRATE ACTUALLY
LET&apos;S TALK ABOUT WHAT WILL
HAPPEN IF WE DON&apos;T DO THIS
RECENTRE WE WILL CONTINUE
SPRAWL DEVELOPMENT WHICH IS
BEYOND THERE&apos;S A HUGE DEMAND TO
LIVE IN ANN ARBOR AND WE DON&apos;T
NEED THAT AND DEMAND WE WILL
SEE MORE PEOPLE MOVING INTO THE
REGION INTO DETACHED MANSIONS
THAT HAVE SUSTAINABILITY
REQUIREMENTS THAT ARE NOT
ACCESSIBLE BY ANY MODES
OF TRANSPORTATION OTHER THAN
PRIVATE CARS.
IT WILL CONTINUE AS A RESULT TO
SEE MORE TRAFFIC IN OUR CITY
FOR ALL THOSE PEOPLE DRIVING
INTO THE CITY AND WE WILL
CONTINUE TO SEE HOUSING PRICES
RISE PRECIPITOUSLY BECAUSE
THESE EXURBAN DEVELOPMENTS
WON&apos;T BE AFFORDABLE.
AND IN ADDITION TO THAT THEY&apos;LL
ALSO BE BURDENED BY HIGH
TRANSPORTATION COSTS BECAUSE
CARS ARE EXPENSIVE TO ONLY
ATTAIN BY STADIUM WILL CONTINUE
TO BE A HOSTILE PLACE TO WALK
OR RIDE A BIKE.
&gt;&gt; IT REALLY IS A PRETTY
HOSTILE PLACE TO WALK AND RIDE
A BIKE RIGHT.
IT&apos;S FORECASTER&apos;S AND GIANT
SURFACE PARKING LOT AND YOU
KNOW, LOOK, THE LAST TIME WE
UPDATED COMPREHENSIVE LAND USE
PLAN 2009 THERE WAS ACTUALLY A
WHOLE SET OF PROGRAMS TO TRY TO
IMPROVE THIS AND YOU KNOW, SOME
OF THEM HAVE BEEN DONE BUT
ULTIMATELY IT&apos;S FAILED.
LET&apos;S LET&apos;S NOT FORGET SOMEBODY
WAS KILLED TRYING TO CROSS THE
RIVER THIS YEAR.
SO THE LESSON IS WE CANNOT MAKE
THIS CORRIDOR TRULY WELCOMING
FOR PEOPLE USING ALL MODES
OF TRANSPORTATION UNLESS WE
ACTUALLY CHANGE THE UNDERLYING
LAND USE PATTERNS.
IF WE DON&apos;T RESULT ON THIS
CORRIDOR, IT&apos;S GOING TO GET
WORSE, NOT BETTER.
THE DEVELOPMENTS WE&apos;VE SEEN
PROPOSED ALONG WITH THE STADIUM
IN THE PAST YEARS AND DRIVE
THROUGH BANKS STORAGE FACILITY
AND NOW LIKE THE PARKING LOT
OF TWENTY 60 STADIUM AS A SIGN
OF ADVERTISING MAYBE SOMEBODY
COULD BUILD A NEW CAR
DEALERSHIP.
&gt;&gt; REALLY THAT WOULD BE MUCH
THESE ARE THE SORTS OF USES
THAT TEND TO DRIVE A
DISPROPORTIONATE NUMBER
OF CARS, TRUCKS AND CREATE
DISPROPORTIONATELY DANGEROUS
CONFLICT AREAS FOR BICYCLISTS
AND OF THE EXISTING LOCAL
BUSINESSES ON THIS CORRIDOR AND
I WON&apos;T LIE.
I DIDN&apos;T SHARE SOME OF THE
CONCERNS EXPRESSED BY OTHERS
ABOUT THE CHANGES COMING TO
THIS CORRIDOR WHETHER WE LIKE
IT OR NOT AND THE RISKS OF NOT
DOING TCE ONE ARE MUCH WORSE
THAN THE RISKS OF DOING IT.
&gt;&gt; THIS IS THE BASELINE THAT
WE&apos;RE COMPETING AGAINST IF WE
DO NOT CHANGES KIND OF BUT WE
CAN INFLUENCE WHAT FORM THAT
CHANGE WILL TAKE AND THAT&apos;S WE
SHOULD DO YOU SEE ONE THIS IS
WHY SEE ONE CASE GOOD FOR
SUSTAINABILITY AFFORDABILITY
EVEN IF IT DOESN&apos;T INCLUDE
SPECIFIC THANK YOU.
&gt;&gt; OUR NEXT SPEAKER IS AN
BANNISTER AND M. PHONE NUMBER
SIX OH FOUR A.M. GO AHEAD AND
MUTE YOUR PHONE
MAKE YOU AN
INDIAN FOR FORMER WARD ONE CITY
COUNCIL MEMBER AND FORMER
CANDIDATE
FOR MAYOR WHO
RECEIVED NEARLY THIRTY NINE
PERCENT OF THE VOTE IN JUST
FOUR MONTHS OF CAMPAIGNING.
AND I AM CALLING TO URGE YOU TO
VOTE NO ON THE ONE THE TRANSIT
CORRIDOR DISTRICT FOR STADIUM
AND MAPLE AND AVOID
IRREVERSIBLE MISTAKES WITH OUR
LAND USE AND AVOID GREAT LOSS
OF OUR COMMUNITY BENEFIT.
FURTHERMORE WE GO ONE SIZE FITS
ALL ZONING IN ITS CURRENT FORM
THIS REDNECK WHO WAS NOT AN AND
SYNAGRO.
I&apos;D LIKE TO THANK ALL THE
RESIDENTS AND LOCAL BUSINESS
OWNERS AND CITY STATE WHO HAVE
PROVIDED VALUABLE FEEDBACK AND
INPUT IF IT HAD FOLLOWED HERE
AT THE CITY PLANNING COMMISSION
AND THE MAYOR AND HIS COUNCIL
MAJORITY I URGE EVERYONE TO ASK
WHERE&apos;S THE PUBLIC BENEFIT AND
WHO&apos;S BENEFITING AND FOLLOW THE
MONEY TO THE MAYOR AND HIS
ALIEN ALLIES.
CAMPAIGN DONORS LISTED ON THEIR
CAMPAIGN FINANCE REPORT.
WHILE MOST RESIDENTS ARE
GREATLY IN FAVOR OF USABILITY,
SUSTAINABILITY AND
AFFORDABILITY OF OUR
NEIGHBORHOOD, THE DC ONE
OF SOMETHING THAT WE&apos;RE
DISCUSSING NOW THAT ACHIEVE OUR
STATED GOALS AND IS MERELY A
LAND SPECULATOR DREAM COME
TRUE.
IT GIVES DEVELOPERS FREE REIGN
TO DEVELOP DENSITY AS THE
MARKET WILL BEAR WITHOUT ANY
FURTHER CONSEQUENT IMPACT ON
THE QUALITY OF LIFE FOR
RESIDENTS AND WITHOUT INCLUDING
COMMUNITY BENEFITS LIKE MANY
OF OUR CITY BY CITY COUNCIL AND
SAYS THAT THE CITY WILL BE SUED
IF WE DON&apos;T APPROVE NEW
DEVELOPMENTS THAT COMPLY WITH
THE ZONING.
AND IT IS AT THIS VERY MOMENT
WHEN THE CITY IS ZONING
PROPERTY THAT WE SHOULD INCLUDE
A REQUIREMENT FOR COMMUNITY
BENEFIT EVERYONE IS CREATING
THE RIGHT CONDITIONS FOR
DEVELOPERS WITHOUT OUR
CONSISTENCY WITH OUR STATED
GOAL, WITHOUT THE OVERDUE
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN UPDATE AND
TRULY LISTENING TO THE RIGOROUS
DISCUSSION GOING ON WITH
RESIDENTS, LOCAL BUSINESS AND
WORK GROUPS WE ARE NOW ZONING
AND THAT EVEN CITY PLANNING
STAFF RECOMMENDED AGAINST BUT
WERE IGNORED BY THE MAYOR&apos;S
APPOINTEES AND CITY PLANNING
COMMISSION FOR THE INPUT THE
PLANNING COMMISSION AND THE
COUNCIL MAJORITY ARE IGNORING A
JUNE 28 MEMO WRITTEN THIRTY
SEVEN THOUSAND RESIDENTS AND
AND THEY WENT ON AHEAD AND
APPROVED IT ZERO.
FURTHERMORE THE BRICK MORE
PROPERTY GROUP HAD WRITTEN IN
AUGUST LETTING THEM KNOW THAT
AND THAT IS BEING IGNORED AT
GREAT LEGAL PERIL TO THE CITY
WHERE THEY OPPOSE THIS ONE
BUILDING AND SUGGEST OTHER
ALTERNATIVE TIME.
&gt;&gt; LASTLY, THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
IS MR. LIPSON HERE IS HIS
BOUNDARIES?
MR. LIPSON, OUR LINE
I DON&apos;T
SEE MR. LIPSON ON LINE.
&gt;&gt; OUR NEXT SPEAKER IS ADAM
YANKOVICH.
ADAM DISCOVERED HELLO.
&gt;&gt; THIS IS ANDREW 1744.
I FOLLOW MPAC ONE IN GENERAL
THIS IN PARTICULAR MANY
MEETINGS LISTENED TO AND GIVEN
PUBLIC COMMENTS ON THIS TOPIC.
I WANTED TO GET MY HISTORY, MY
SUPPORT.
I LIVE IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD AT
THE SOUTHERN END OF THE
CORRIDOR.
I GREW UP NEAR THE NORTHERN END
OF THE CORRIDOR SO CHANGES HERE
OVER THE PAST FEW DECADES AND
FREQUENT SEVERAL BUSINESSES ON
THE STRIP OF MY COMMENTS TO
SOME CONCERNS ABOUT
SUSTAINABILITY REDUCING VEHICLE
,MORE WALKABLE DEVELOPMENT
WELL CONNECTED WITH TRANSIT IS
A HUGE SUSTAINABILITY FOR
MULTIFAMILY HOUSING REQUIRES
LESS INFRASTRUCTURE AND LESS
ENERGY PER PERSON TO HEAT AND
COOL DUE TO SHARE ALSO
ECONOMIES OF SCALE SETBACKS
WALKABILITY TO A GOAL CALLED
STICKY EDGES AT STREET LEVEL
USES THE POOR PEOPLE IN
STOREFRONTS WITH WINDOW
DISPLAYS, SIDEWALK DINING AND
SO FORTH.
THIS IS THE DEFINITION
OF NEIGHBORHOOD CHARACTER AND
LIVELINESS AND IT IS WHAT
PLACES LIKE DOWNTOWN SO
WALKABLE DIPSET THAT ACCELERON
SEPARATING SIDEWALKS FROM
STOREFRONTS HAVE A NEGATIVE
EFFECT ON WALKABILITY SHOPS
WALKING ALONG THE SIDEWALK WITH
SPEEDING CARS ON ONE SIDE IN A
PARKING LOT AND THE OTHER IN
THE HOT SUN.
IT&apos;S NOT PLEASANT.
I USUALLY PREFER WALKING IN THE
SHADE UP AGAINST THE SIDEWALK,
PROVIDE A SHELTER EFFECT DESIGN
FOR SAFE STREET OR ONE SIZE
FITS ALL DC ONE WAS DESIGNED TO
BE FLEXIBLE ENOUGH TO BE
APPLIED TO MANY CORRIDORS.
IN FACT WEST STADIUM WAS
BROUGHT UP AS APPROPRIATE
EXAMPLE WHICH SHOULD BE APPLIED
AS WE&apos;RE WATCHING ON PLYMOUTH
THIS THIS DISPLACEMENT THERE&apos;S
PLENTY OF EMPTY SPACE IN THE
CORRIDOR FRANSCELL NOT
CONVINCED THIS REZONING WILL
CAUSE THE DISPLACEMENT
OF BUSINESSES AND THE CONTRARY
RESIDENTS AND REMARKABILITY IN
TRANSIT.
I MEAN MORE CUSTOMERS FOR THESE
BUSINESSES PROCESS THE PROCESS
IN DC ONE HAS BEEN QUITE SO
IT&apos;S BEEN DISCUSSED COUNTLESS
MEETINGS FROM DC ON ITSELF TO
THE REGION.
IT&apos;S NEEDED A BUSINESS PLANNING
COMMISSION OR CITY COUNCIL.
I ATTENDED MANY MEETINGS BUT
MANY MEMBERS OF THE PUBLIC
SPEAK BOTH FOR AND AGAINST
IDEAS CONVERSATIONS.
THIS IS ONE SOME SORT
OF BACKROOM DEAL WITHOUT PUBLIC
INPUT.
I&apos;M EXCITED TO SEE THIS HAPPEN
IN MY NEIGHBORHOOD.
I&apos;M EXCITED TO SEE A PERSON
MORE PEDESTRIAN AND TRANSIT
ORIENTED DEVELOPMENT AND ARE
EXCITED TO SEE MOVEMENT TOWARD
AN ACTIVE STICKY SHELTER AND
WELL AS PROPERTIES GET
REDEVELOPED THIS SO MUCH
OF WHAT WE&apos;RE TRYING TO DO IN
ANN ARBOR I STRONGLY SUPPORT
THIS REZONING AND I DO NOT SEE
A NEED TO ADJUST IT IN ANY WAY
AFTER SO MUCH DISCUSSION.
PLEASE PASS IT TONIGHT AS
WRITTEN.
I WOULD ALSO LIKE TO EXPRESS MY
SUPPORT FOR MAINTENANCE ON THE
DOWNTOWN.
WELL I HAD NOT BEEN HIT BY A
CAR, HAD A LOT OF CLOSE CALLS
AND TIMES WHEN I HAD TO STOP
SHORT DESPITE HAVING NO WAY TO
AVOID BEING HIT IT&apos;S ALMOST
ALWAYS DUE TO SOMEONE TURNING
RED, NOT EVEN GLANCING
DIRECTION BECAUSE THEY&apos;RE TOO
BUSY LOOKING FOR AN OPENING TO
CROSS AND CROSS TRAFFIC.
I HOPE IT TURNS DOWNTOWN TO BE
THE FIRST OR ANY UNSAFE
PRACTICE THROUGHOUT THE CITY
OF ANN ARBOR AND I HOPE WE CAN
TAKE CONTROL DOWN THAT ROAD.
&gt;&gt; SO CONVENIENT THERE TO THANK
YOU.
THANK YOU FOR THEIR
COMMUNICATIONS TODAY FROM
COUNCIL MEMBER GRISWOLD&apos;S YES.
I&apos;D LIKE TO REPORT ON THE
RESOLUTION CALLING FOR
WORKFORCE HOUSING ON U OF M
PROPERTY BEING BUILT BY PRIVATE
DEVELOPERS ON PROPERTY THAT THE
UNIVERSITY CAN LEASE UP TO
NINETY NINE YEARS THIS IS STILL
IN THE COMMUNICATIONS AND
PROBLEM DEFINITION PHASE BUT
THAT IS REALLY THE MOST
IMPORTANT PHASE AND I LIKE TO
THINK ABOUT THIS AS DENSITY
WITH M. DISRUPTION WE SEEM TO
LIKE TO HAVE A LOT
OF DISRUPTION IN THIS COMMUNITY
AND THAT&apos;S NOT WHAT I&apos;M AIMING
FOR.
THERE ARE THREE RESOLUTIONS ON
THE AGENDA TONIGHT AND THEY ALL
HAVE ONE THING IN COMMON AND
THAT IS THE ABILITY TO SEE
AROUND THE CORNER OR SIGHT
DISTANCE.
THERE IS A GENERALLY ACCEPTED
ENGINEERING STANDARD AND IT&apos;S
CALLED A SITE DISTANCE TRIANGLE
AND THE SIZE OF THE TRIANGLE IS
THE TERM BY THE SPEED ON THE
ROADWAY FOR SOME REASON IN ANN
ARBOR WE DON&apos;T THINK WE NEED TO
ADHERE TO THAT BECAUSE WE&apos;RE
SPECIAL AND WE CAN SEE AROUND
THE CORNER OR EVERYONE FOLLOWS
THE RULES.
&gt;&gt; THAT&apos;S THAT&apos;S NOT THE CASE.
&gt;&gt; SO I&apos;D JUST LIKE TO CONCLUDE
THAT IF ONLY WE WERE NOT A
DEMOCRACY IF WE HAD COMMUNIST
GOVERNMENT IT WOULD BE SO EASY
WE COULD JUST DECIDE ALL OF THE
GOOD THINGS THAT ARE NECESSARY
AND TAKE CARE OF THEM FOR OUR
PUBLIC CALCIUM BRITISH I JUST
WANTED TO QUICKLY REMIND
EVERYONE THAT THIS FRIDAY IS
THE SECOND ANNUAL MAYOR&apos;S
AUTOMAN GREEN FAIR.
IT WILL BE FROM SIX TO NINE
P.M. FRIDAY EVENING ON MAIN
STREET AND I WILL BE AT A TABLE
TALKING ALL ABOUT THE CIRCULAR
ECONOMY AND PROBABLY GETTING
VERY COLD.
BUT I LOOK FORWARD TO SEEING
EVERYONE.
COUNCIL MEMBER O&apos;MALLEY, THANK
YOU.
UM, JUST WANT TO HIGHLIGHT WHAT
WAS BROUGHT UP BY THE
INDEPENDENT COMMUNITY OVERSIGHT
COMMISSION.
UH, PLEASE OVERSEE THE
COMMISSION AND THAT IS THE
REACTION TO THE EFFORTS BEING
MADE FOR ENGAGEMENT, PUBLIC
ENGAGEMENT FOR THE POLICE
RESPONSE OR UNARMED EMERGENCY
RESPONSE THAT IS AND I
APPRECIATE MR DOWNIE&apos;S RESPONSE
TO THAT COMMUNICATION THAT WE
RECEIVED FROM ECHO PARK.
IT&apos;S INCLUDED IN OUR AGENDA IN
THE EMAIL THAT WE RECEIVED FROM
MR DHONI EARLIER TODAY.
UM, HOPEFULLY THE CITY AND THE
COMMISSION CONTINUE TO ENGAGE
SO THAT THE END PRODUCT IS IS
WHAT THE PUBLIC DESERVES AND IS
ASKING FOR AND I FEEL
COMFORTABLE BELIEVING MACEDONIA
IS DOING JUST THAT.
UM ALSO I AM NOT SURE IF THIS
IS COMMUNICATION BUT JUST A
REQUEST THAT WE MOVE THE CLOSED
SESSION TO TALK ABOUT GALMAN IN
THE AGENDA AFTER C ONE OR
SOMETHING BEFORE WE GET INTO DC
INTO SOME OF THE OTHER POLICY
ISSUES THAT ARE GOING TO BE
LENGTHY AND WE HAVE EXPENSIVE
ATTORNEYS I BELIEVE UM WAITING
FOR US TO GO INTO CLOSED
SESSION.
THANK YOU FOR THE COMMUNICATION
FROM COUNSEL COUNCIL MEMBER
HAYNER.
THANKS MR MAYOR.
YOU KNOW GENERALLY I&apos;D AGREE TO
LET THE ATTORNEY STOP BILLING
US BUT I THINK THERE&apos;S A LOT
OF PEOPLE HERE WHO ARE HERE
SPECIFICALLY FOR THAT PUBLIC
HEARING AND OTHER THINGS.
SO I&apos;M NOT SURE THAT WOULD BE A
GOOD AGENDA CHANGE.
I&apos;M GLAD THAT MY COUNCIL WORD
COLLEAGUE HERE MENTIONED THE
GREEN FAIR IN CASE YOU HADN&apos;T
SEEN IT IN THE OBSERVER AD OR
THE BANNER ON THE FRONT OF THE
BUILDING OR THE MANY POSTCARDS
THAT HAVE BEEN COMING TO MY
HOUSE THAT MAKE ME THINK THAT
PERHAPS THE CITY REALLY WANTS
TO SLIP AROUND THE RULES ABOUT
NOT PROMOTING CLIMATE ACTION
MYTHOLOGY&apos;S CAME ON THE SAME
DAY THE C NEVER SEEMS TO
FIND PLENTY OF MONEY TO SEND
POSTCARDS TO HOUSES ALL THE
HOUSES WHEN THEY WANT TO
PROMOTE A VILLAGE BUT NOT WHEN
WE REZONE TWENTY FOUR THOUSAND
PARCELS WITH EDU AS AN EXAMPLE.
AND SO I THINK IT&apos;S KIND OF AND
I&apos;M A LITTLE CONCERNED THE DOG
AND PONY SHOW THAT&apos;S GOING TO
HAPPEN THIS GREEN FAIR SAYS
HERE THAT COLLABORATOR&apos;S ARE
GOING TO SPREAD THE WORD ON
WHAT YOU CAN DO TO HELP US
ACHIEVE CARBON NEUTRALITY.
I&apos;M GUESSING THAT THAT WORD IS
VOTE YES THE CLIMATE VILLAGE.
BUT YOU KNOW, WE&apos;RE NOT ALLOWED
TO SAY THAT WE&apos;RE NOT ALLOWED
TO USE TAXPAYER DOLLARS TO
ACTUALLY PROMOTE A VILLAGE
ALTHOUGH I NOTICED THAT IN THE
CAMPAIGN FINANCE REPORTS THAT
THE MAYOR GAVE A DIRECT SIXTY
FIVE HUNDRED DOLLAR
CONTRIBUTION TO THIS POSTCARD
OR SO MAKE OF IT WHAT YOU WILL
THANK YOU.
FURTHER COMMUNICATION FROM
COUNCIL MEMBER DENHA.
&gt;&gt; THANK YOU, MAYOR.
FOR THOSE OF YOU WHO WOULD LIKE
TO VOTE YES, I&apos;M A COMMUNITY
CLIMATE VILLAGE OR ANY OTHER
PARTICIPATING IN THE OTHER
LOCAL ELECTION.
I JUST WANTED TO TAKE A MOMENT
TO APPLAUD OUR CITY CLERK&apos;S
OFFICE FOR ONCE AGAIN WORKING
ON THE CAMPUS THEY HAVE
RETURNED WITH THEIR POLLING OR
WITH THEIR SATELLITE OFFICE AT
THE MUSEUM OF ART WHICH WAS
OPENED IN TWENTY TWENTY AND
HAVE EXPANDED TO A SECOND
LOCATION SET ON NORTH CAMPUS AS
WELL.
SO I ENCOURAGE STUDENTS WHO ARE
LOOKING TO GET THEIR BALLOTS
VOTE EARLY OR GET OTHER
INFORMATION ABOUT THE ELECTION
TO VISIT THOSE LOCATIONS ON
CAMPUS AND MAKE USE OF THOSE
AND THANK YOU TO THE CLERK&apos;S
OFFICE FOR DOING SO FURTHER
COMMUNICATION COUNCILPERSON
.
I WANTED TO THANK OUR CITY
ADMINISTRATORS OFFICE AS WELL
AS OUR LOBBYING FIRM FOR
ASSISTING ME IN COMING UP WITH
AN EMAIL TO THE THE WHITE HOUSE
AND ENCOURAGING PRESIDENT BIDEN
TO VISIT AND HOPEFULLY GIVE US
A BIT OF SUPPORT WITH OUR SOLAR
SOLAR PROJECTS AND OUR OUR
SOLAR INFILL PROJECTS WHICH
WILL BE THE LARGEST PROJECT IN
THE U.S. IF WE CAN GET TO THE
FINAL FEDERAL FUNDING.
SO THIS WAS A CONCERTED EFFORT
.
HOPEFULLY HE CAN COME AND
VISIT.
WE CAN WE CAN WELCOME HIM.
I ALSO WANTED TO REPORT THAT
I&apos;LL BE PARTICIPATING IN YOU
EVENTS BIG IDEAS SUMMIT IN A
COUPLE OF WEEKS AND SOME OF THE
ISSUES THAT WE&apos;LL BE DISCUSSING
INCLUDE AFFORDABLE HOUSING,
CLIMATE ACTION, TRANSPORTATION.
SO I&apos;LL REPORT OUT WHAT I
LEARNED THERE.
IT&apos;S AN ALL DAY ACTUALLY IT&apos;S A
TWO DAY EFFORT ON THE 14TH AND
15TH AND I HOPE TO SEE OTHER
FOLKS THERE.
&gt;&gt; THANKS.
&gt;&gt; COUNCIL NEVER BRIGS.
ONE MORE THING ON VOTING THINGS
TO COUNCIL MEMBER DENHA
BRINGING ON ON CAMPUS VOTING AT
THE ART MUSEUM ALSO MENTIONED
THAT ON OCTOBER 14 THERE&apos;S
GOING TO BE AN ART MUSEUM A
FEEL GOOD FRIDAY.
IT&apos;S AN INTERACTIVE NIGHT
OF POLITICAL ISSUES AND ARTIST
AND SO YOU&apos;LL BE ABLE TO COME
IN HERE FROM HERE FROM LOCAL
POLICY EXPERTS ON IMPORTANT
BALLOT ISSUES AND WE&apos;LL BE
TALKING ABOUT A WIDE VARIETY
OF ISSUES.
I&apos;LL BE THERE TALKING ABOUT
TRANSPORTATION.
THERE&apos;LL BE A LOT OF OTHER
INTERACTIVE INTERESTING THINGS
GOING ON AT THE MUSEUM THAT
NIGHT FROM SEVEN TO 10 P.M. AND
THANKS WE&apos;LL HAVE TO LEAVE IT
AT THAT FOR COMMUNICATION.
&gt;&gt; BUT I&apos;D LIKE TO REQUEST
CONFIRMATION THE FOLLOWING
APPOINTMENTS THAT ARE PRESENTED
TO COUNCIL SEPTEMBER 19 REGULAR
SESSION TO THE DOWNTOWN AREA
CITIZENS ADVISORY COUNCIL
ANGELA PETE TO THE ENERGY
COMMISSION MIKE PERKOWITZ MOVED
BY COUNCIL MEMBER JOSH SECONDED
BY COUNCILMAN BERGRIN
DISCUSSION ON FAVOR POSED.
THEY ARE APPROVED.
THEY COULD RECOMMEND THE
FOLLOWING FOR YOUR
CONSIDERATION TO THE HARBOR
AREA AUTHORITY BOARD
OF DIRECTORS CHRIS ALLEN TO THE
DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY
CHRIS NICLAS STEPHEN BRUMMER
AND DANIELLE VAN.
WE HAVE A MOTION PLEASE TO
APPROVE THE CONSENT AGENDA MOVE
BY COUNCILMAN 2ND BY COUNCILMAN
GRISWOLD DISCUSSION OF CONSENT
AGENDA ON UNFAVORITE OPPOSED
CONSENT AGENDA IS APPROVED WITH
ELEVEN COUNCIL MEMBERS PRESENT
ALL VOTE IN THE AFFIRMATIVE
THUS SATISFYING THE EIGHT FOOT
REQUIREMENT WITH RESPECT TO A
TWO 06 07 C8 I&apos;M SORRY COUNCIL
MAHINA WELL THANKS.
I MEAN I WAS GOING TO VOTE FOR
IT BUT I HAD MY HAND UP TO MAKE
A COMMENT IF I MAY HAVE FACT IF
THAT&apos;S OK.
PARDON ME IF I CAN AFTER THE
FACT YEAH LET&apos;S LET&apos;S ROLL THAT
BACK WITH ANYBODY OBJECT
LURKING AROUND THE CONSENT THE
GENTLEMAN YEAH I JUST WANT TO
CALL OUT A TEN WHICH IS ON HERE
IF PEOPLE HAD NOTICED THAT WE
HAVE A SOMEBODY WHOSE PROJECT
IS IN DEVELOPMENT HERE A PRETTY
LARGE PROJECT HERE IN THE CITY
THE DOWNTOWN AREA AND THEY ARE
ASKING US TO FOR OUR CONSENT TO
PULL BACK FROM THEIR PARKING
AGREEMENT BECAUSE AT LAST
WEEK&apos;S MEETING WE DID AWAY
RECENTLY WE DID AWAY WITH
PARKING MINIMUMS.
SO ANYONE CAN BUILD A BUILDING
NOW IN THE CITY WITHOUT
PROVIDING A LICK OF PARKING AND
BECAUSE THIS IS IN THE PROCESS
IT ISN&apos;T BUILT YET.
THEY&apos;RE ASKING FOR SOME
MODIFICATIONS TO THAT
DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT TO GET
OUT OF PROVIDING PARKING ON
THAT SPACE IN A MANNER.
AND SO I JUST WANTED TO POINT
IT OUT TO FOLKS THAT, YOU KNOW,
SOME THINGS THAT WE DO HAVE
IMMEDIATE EFFECT HERE IN THE
COMMUNITY FOR GOOD OR ILL.
&gt;&gt; THANK YOU FOR THE
DISCUSSION.
THE CONSENT AGENDA FAVOR PAUL
THAT THE JUDGE HAS APPROVED 11
COUNCIL MEMBERS PRESENT ALL
VOTE IN THE AFFIRMATIVE THAT
SATISFIED THE VOTE REQUIREMENT
PERSPECTIVE TO SEE TO SEE A SIX
TO SEVEN EIGHT THAT IS ALL YOU
NOW COME TO A PUBLIC HEARING.
PUBLIC HEARINGS ARE
OPPORTUNITIES FOR MEMBERS
OF THE PUBLIC TO SPEAK TO
COUNCIL AND THE COMMUNITY ABOUT
A SPECIFIC ITEM OF THE AGENDA.
THAT IS TO SAY THE SPECIFIC
SUBJECT MATTER OF THE PUBLIC
HEARING THE SPEAKER PUBLIC AT A
PUBLIC HEARING YOU NEED NOT
HAVE SIGNED UP IN ADVANCE BUT
YOUR SPEECH MUST RELATE TO THE
SPECIFICS SUBJECT MATTER OF THE
PUBLIC HEARING THAT IS TO SAY
THE SPECIFIC ITEM ON THE AGENDA
SPEAKERS HAVE THREE MINUTES IN
WHICH TO SPEAK SO PLEASE PAY
CLOSE ATTENTION.
AT THE TIME WE CAN ONLY HAVE
ONE PERSON SPEAKING AT A TIME
WHEN YOUR TIME HAS EXPIRED.
PLEASE CONCLUDE YOUR REMARKS
AND CEDE THE FLOOR.
IS THERE ANYONE WHO WOULD LIKE
TO SPEAK AT PUBLIC DEPARTMENT?
IS THERE SO PUBLICLY NO ONE IN
AUDIENCE TO AMEND SECTION EIGHT
FIVE THREE ZERO AND AND SECTION
EIGHT FIVE THREE ONE TO CHAPTER
ONE ZERO FIVE.
I WAS IN CODE OF TITLE EIGHT
OF THE ANN ARBOR CITY CODE .
IS THERE ANYONE WHO&apos;D LIKE TO
SPEAK AT THIS PUBLIC HEARING TO
DO SO PLEASE JUST COME ON UP.
YOU NEED TO RAISE YOUR HAND OR
Q
HI FOLKS.
MY NAME IS JOHN SMITH.
I&apos;VE BEEN A MENTOR AND RESIDENT
IN ANN ARBOR FOR THE PAST SIX
YEARS AND I&apos;M HERE TODAY
OBVIOUSLY TO TALK ABOUT THE
RIGHT TO RENEW ORDINANCE.
I TALK TO FRIENDS FROM OUT
OF TOWN ABOUT POWER RENTAL
MARKET WORKS AND WHAT IT&apos;S LIKE
TO RENT HERE.
THEY GENERALLY LOOK AT ME LIKE
I HAVE THREE HEADS RIGHT.
IT&apos;S NEWS TO NOBODY THAT THE
RENTAL MARKET IS DEEPLY
DYSFUNCTIONAL.
IN FACT I WAS ASKED BY MY
LANDLORD YESTERDAY TO RENEW AT
LEAST IT STARTED FEWER THAN
FORTY DAYS AGO.
THE TO RENEW ORDINANCE IS NOT
AN EXTREME PIECE
OF LEGISLATION.
WE&apos;RE JUST TRYING TO GET THE
RENTAL MARKET TO FUNCTION A
LITTLE BIT MORE LIKE MOST OTHER
RENTAL MARKETS IN THE COUNTRY
IT&apos;S BEEN REVIEWED BY MULTIPLE
REVIEWED AND ENDORSED BY
MULTIPLE PARTS OF CITY
GOVERNMENT AS WELL A COMMUNITY
THAT I&apos;VE TALKED ABOUT THAT AT
PRIOR MEETINGS.
I WANT TO TALK TODAY ABOUT
LANDLORDS.
RIGHT.
WE HAVE HEARD FROM LANDLORDS
AND THEIR ALLIES COUNCIL AND
THEIR ASSOCIATIONS ABOUT HOW
THEY&apos;VE NOT BEEN ENGAGED
APPROPRIATELY ON THIS ISSUE AND
WE KNOW THAT&apos;S NOT TRUE FOR
YOUR EMAILS BETWEEN LANDLORDS
AND CITY COUNCIL, WE KNOW THAT
THERE&apos;S BEEN A HEALTHY VOLUME
OF ENGAGEMENT BETWEEN LANDLORDS
AND MEMBERS OF CITY COUNCIL.
BUT I WANT TO TALK ABOUT THE
SUBSTANCE OF THE COMPLAINTS
THAT THEY HAVE MADE ABOUT THE
ORDINANCE.
IT&apos;S LANDLORDS CLAIM THAT THERE
IS A SILENT MAJORITY
OF UNDERGRADUATES, FOR EXAMPLE
,WHO DO NOT SUPPORT RIGHT TO
RENEW AND DO NOT WANT TO SEE IT
PASSED THE CENTRAL STUDENT
GOVERNMENT WHICH IS THE BODY
THAT REPRESENTS UNDERGRADS ON
YOUR CAMPUS HAS ENDORSED RIGHT
TO RENEW ON TOP OF THAT I DO
NOT KNOW OF A SINGLE TENANT
UNDERGROUND OR OTHERWISE WHO
HAS BEEN CONTACTED AND ENGAGED
BY THE LANDLORD ON THIS ISSUE.
THEY ARE NOT CALLING US UP AND
ASKING WHAT WE THINK THEY&apos;RE
JUST SORT IMAGINING IT.
I DON&apos;T FALL FOR THAT SECOND
ONE WOULD SAY THAT THEY LOVE
LEASE RENEWALS AND THAT THIS
ISN&apos;T A PROBLEM.
BUT WE&apos;VE HEARD FROM PUBLIC
COMMENTATORS AND PEOPLE WHO
HAVE EMAILED CITY COUNCIL WE&apos;VE
HAD THERE WE&apos;VE BEEN
ESSENTIALLY EVICTED FROM THEIR
HOMES BECAUSE THEY DID NOT WHEN
THEIR LANDLORDS TIMELINE.
BUT WE KNOW THIS IS A REAL
PROBLEM ACTUALLY THEY SAY THAT
UNDER THIS ORDINANCE THEY WON&apos;T
BE ABLE TO EVICT TENANTS.
THIS IS ALSO FALSE UNDER THE
LANGUAGE OF THE ORDINANCE.
IT&apos;S VERY CLEAR IF YOU VIOLATE
THE TERMS OF YOUR LEASE YOU&apos;RE
NOT ENTITLED TO A RENEWAL.
THIS IS NOT A COMPLEX LEGAL
QUESTION.
IT IS ADDRESSED PRETTY CLEARLY
AND UNAMBIGUOUSLY IN THE
LANGUAGE OF THE ORDINANCE.
SO TO BE FAIR TO LANDLORDS AND
THEY ARE TO HAVE OFFERED USEFUL
FEEDBACK ON THE LANGUAGE OF THE
ORDINANCE.
THAT FEEDBACK HAS BEEN
INCORPORATED BY MEMBERS OF THE
RENTERS COMMISSION AND MEMBERS
OF CITY COUNCIL AND THE IDEA
THAT THEY NEED MORE TIME TO
CONSIDER THIS ORDINANCE IS A
BAD FAITH ATTEMPT TO DELAY ITS
PASSAGE INDEFINITELY AND I HOPE
THAT YOU CAN SEE IT FOR WHAT IT
IS.
I JUST WANT TO SAY ONE MORE
THING LANDLORDS DON&apos;T SPEAK
FOR
TENANTS.
THEY TRAVEL ALL THE TIME BUT
YOU KNOW, THEY DON&apos;T REPRESENT
US.
THEY DO NOT ADVOCATE FOR US.
RENTERS ARE PERFECTLY CAPABLE
OF SPEAKING FOR OURSELVES.
WHAT WE&apos;RE ASKING TONIGHT IS
WHAT WE&apos;VE ASKED FOR THE PAST
SEVERAL MONTHS.
WE WANT YOU TO PASS RIGHT TO
RENEW INTO LAW.
SO I HOPE TONIGHT THAT YOU WILL
LISTEN TO US AND THAT YOU WILL
DO THE RIGHT.
&gt;&gt; THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
I EVERYONE I AM YOUR FRESHMAN
MEMBER AND GRAD STUDENT HERE AT
UM I AM HERE TODAY TO TALK
ABOUT RIGHT TO RENEW BEFORE I
GET INTO IT I WOULD LIKE TO
PRESENT OUR PETITION WHICH IS
SIX HUNDRED SEVENTY EIGHT
SIGNATURES.
SHOULD I PRESENT TO THE CLERK
PLEASE?
THANK YOU
.
&gt;&gt; THREE YEARS AGO I WAS LIVING
IN A PROPERTY OWNED BY OR
MANAGED BY CAPRIO AND THEY
ASKED ME TO RENEW MY LEASE IN
NOVEMBER TWENTY NINETEEN UNTIL
AUGUST TWENTY TWENTY ONE WHICH
IS TOTALLY RIDICULOUS.
I ASKED FOR MORE TIME.
THEY TOLD ME SOMEONE WAS COMING
TO SEE MY APARTMENT IN TWENTY
FOUR HOURS I ASKED IF I COULD
INCLUDE THE TERMINATION CLAUSE
IN THE LEASE SOMETHING
EXTREMELY GENEROUS WERE AFTER
SIX MONTHS I COULD GIVE THEM
THREE MONTHS NOTICE TO BREAK MY
LEASE AND THEY DIDN&apos;T THINK
THAT WAS ENOUGH SO THEY
ABSOLUTELY REFUSED SURPRISE
SURPRISE WHEN I RENEWED TEN
MONTHS LATER BEFORE THE NEXT
TERM OF THE LEASE HAD EVEN
STARTED I ALREADY KNEW I
COULDN&apos;T STAY IN THE APARTMENT.
THEY REFUSED TO EVEN NEGOTIATE
WITH ME ABOUT GETTING OUT
OF IT.
&gt;&gt; THEY THREATENED TO SUE ME.
I EVENTUALLY WAS ABLE TO FIND A
SUBTENANT.
THE TENANT LOST THEIR JOB
BECAUSE OF COVID THEY TRIED TO
EVICT THE SUBTENANT GOING
AROUND THE COVID EVICTION
MORATORIUM SUED ME AGAIN AND
NOW HERE WE ARE.
SO I&apos;M GLAD TO SEE THAT YOU
KNOW FROM THAT EXPERIENCE WE&apos;VE
BEEN ABLE TO GENERATE THE
ACTUAL CHANGE, REINTERPRET
RENTERS AFTER TODAY, YOU KNOW,
TENS OF THOUSANDS OF PEOPLE THE
MAJORITY OF THIS TOWN ARE NO
LONGER GOING TO HAVE TO WONDER
WHETHER THEIR APARTMENT HAS
BEEN RENTED OUT FROM UNDER THEM
WITHOUT THE LANDLORD EVEN
GIVING THEM THE COURTESY
OF ASKING IF THEY WANT TO RENEW
THEY WON&apos;T HAVE TO LIVE IN FEAR
OF SEEING THE WRONG THING WHEN
THEY&apos;RE INTERACTING WITH THEIR
LANDLORD AND THEN BEING THROWN
OUT OF THEIR APARTMENT AS A
CONSEQUENCE AND THEY WON&apos;T HAVE
TO WORRY ABOUT BEING SEEN AS AN
UPPITY TENANT WHEN ASKING FOR
MUCH NEEDED REPAIRS THAT
LANDLORDS MORE OFTEN THAN NOT
DO NOT EVEN MAKE.
I WOULD BE REMISS IF I DIDN&apos;T
MENTION THAT I&apos;M QUITE
DISAPPOINTED THAT TENANTS WITH
LEASES FOR THE TWENTY TWENTY
TWO TWENTY TWENTY THREE
ACADEMIC YEAR ARE NOT GOING TO
BE PROTECTED BY THIS ORDINANCE
.
PEOPLE WILL BE EVICTED BECAUSE
OF THIS FAILURE.
I UNDERSTAND IT TOOK TWO AND A
HALF MONTHS TO GET TO GET THE
ORDINANCE FROM THAT WAS WHEN WE
FIRST SUBMITTED IT TO THE CITY
TO WHERE IT IS TODAY AND THOSE
ARE IMPROVEMENTS.
&gt;&gt; WHAT&apos;S FRUSTRATING TO ME IS
THAT THERE&apos;S TWO AND A HALF
MONTHS WERE JULY TO SEPTEMBER
AND NOT APRIL TO JULY.
WE STILL HAVE NOT BEEN GIVEN AN
EXPLANATION FOR WHY THIS DELAY
OCCURRED AND CITY COUNCIL STILL
IS NOT TAKING RESPONSIBILITY
FOR THE FACT THAT PEOPLE ARE
GOING TO GET EVICTED THIS YEAR
.
WE&apos;RE STILL VERY GLAD TO SEE
THIS HAPPENING.
I HOPE THIS IS A NEW PAGE FOR
COUNCIL.
I WANT TO TAKE THE LEAD.
THANK YOU.
ON ISSUES LIKE THIS, THE
MICHIGAN BLAZING A TRAIL FOR
TENANTS IN MUNICIPALITIES.
THANK YOU.
ALL RIGHT.
THANK YOU EVERYONE.
THANK YOU.
ANYONE ELSE I&apos;D LIKE TO SPEAK
THANK YOU EVERYONE.
AT THIS PUBLIC HEAR
.
&gt;&gt; HI MY NAME IS JULIA.
GOOD AND I&apos;M A TENANT IN ANN
ARBOR.
A COUPLE OF THINGS I WANT TO
PUSH.
I&apos;M REALLY GLAD GRADUATE
STUDENTS ARE HERE AND THEY&apos;VE
BEEN LEADING THE FIGHT ON THIS
BECAUSE A LOT OF PEOPLE MY AGE
WHO ARE TENNANT&apos;S WHICH AS FAR
AS I CAN CALCULATE IS ABOUT A
QUARTER OF THE CITY THAT&apos;S A
LOT OF PEOPLE WHO ARE TENANTS
AND NOT RELATED TO STUDENTS AND
I THINK WE ARE REALLY
DISREGARDED AND THIS DOES
AFFECT US.
IT&apos;S NOT JUST STUDENT HOUSING
THAT THIS HAPPENS IN.
I MOVED INTO PLACE SEPTEMBER
1ST AND THE FIRST WEEK
OF DECEMBER HANUKKAH I WAS TOLD
WE&apos;RE GOING TO START SHOWING
YOUR APARTMENT.
I COULD JUST HAVE BEEN HERE A
COUPLE MONTHS.
YOU&apos;RE GOING TO SHOW MY IT
DOESN&apos;T MAKE ANY SENSE.
THE NATIONAL APARTMENT
ASSOCIATION SAYS A HEALTHY
VACANCY RATE IS FIVE PERCENT
AND HAS BEEN BENEATH IT FOR
DECADES.
TAKES ONE DAY FOR LAYLA TO RENT
AN APARTMENT.
WHY DO THEY NEED TO RENT?
&gt;&gt; MOST OF MY FRIENDS WHO ARE
HOMEOWNERS ARE IN TOWN.
WHAT DO I SAY TO THEM?
WELL, I HAVE TO LEAVE THE PLACE
I&apos;M IN BECAUSE I DIDN&apos;T KNOW
EIGHT MONTHS IN ADVANCE THEY
WERE LIKE WHAT DO YOU MEAN THEY
CAN MAKE YOU MOVE DON&apos;T YOU PAY
RENT ON TIME?
I&apos;M LIKE I ALWAYS PAY RENT ON
TIME.
WELL THEN THEY CAN&apos;T MAKE YOU
MOVE.
I&apos;M LIKE YES THEY CAN THEY CAN
DO ANYTHING THEY WANT BECAUSE
ALL THE LAWS FAVOR LANDLORDS.
SO I THINK IT&apos;S REALLY
IMPORTANT THAT RIGHT TO RENEW
IS PASSED.
IT HAS A HUGE IMPACT ON THE
CITY.
&gt;&gt; THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
&gt;&gt; SO ANYONE ELSE LIKE TO SPEAK
AT THIS PUBLIC HEARING?
OH YES.
IT&apos;S BASICALLY I HOPE YOU CAN
PASS THIS BECAUSE I THINK MY
LANDLORD DOESN&apos;T WANT TO OFFER
ME A LEASE RENEWAL WHEN THEY
CAN.
&gt;&gt; I&apos;VE BEEN TRYING TO GET OUR
HOUSING OUT SET UP AND I KNOW
MY LANDLORDS LISTENING TO THIS
TOO SO I WANT TO TALK TO THEM
AS WELL SO I DON&apos;T HAVE TO CALL
THEM IN THE MORNING
.
THEY TOLD YOU AGAIN AND AGAIN
THEY&apos;RE GOING TO CONTACT YOU
AND SAY HEY, IS THIS GOING TO
DISRUPT OUR BUSINESS?
YOU KNOW, THIS IS THE BUSIEST
TIME OF YEAR FOR US.
LIKE THEY SEND ME AN E-MAIL
EVERY YEAR SAYING HEY STUDENTS
MOVE BACK.
THERE&apos;S A LOT OF QUEST FOR
MAINTENANCE.
YOU KNOW, IT COULD TAKE FOUR TO
SIX WEEKS EVEN LONGER TO GET TO
YOUR REQUESTS.
I&apos;M LIKE SO THIS IS TO YOU OR
NOT TO YOU UP CAN IN THE SOUTH
IF YOU WANT LANDLORD IF YOU ARE
CHARGING TEN TO TWENTY PERCENT
MORE YEAR OVER YEAR ON ALL
OF YOUR RENTS YOU CAN AFFORD TO
HIRE SOME NEW PEOPLE TO DO SOME
NEW MAINTENANCE PEOPLE SOME
OFFICE ASSISTANTS, WHATEVER YOU
NEED YOU CAN AFFORD IT.
I ASSURE YOU.
AND WHEN YOU&apos;RE COMPLAINING
ABOUT NOT YOUR BUSINESS BEING
DISRUPTED SO MUCH BECAUSE
TENANTS ARE ASKING FOR JUST A
LITTLE BIT OF RIGHTS AND WHEN
YOU LOOK IT DOESN&apos;T COST
ANYTHING LIKE YOU KNOW AND I&apos;M
SOMEBODY WHO HAS PAID I PAID ON
TIME FOR TWO YEARS AND I&apos;VE
BEEN FIGHTING WITH MY LANDLORD
TO GET THIS HOUSING VOUCHER
ACCEPTED ALL THAT FIRST THING
THEY TOLD ME IS HEY, WE DON&apos;T
ACCEPT HOUSING VOUCHERS.
AND I SAID WELL WE&apos;LL SEE ABOUT
THAT.
THEY CALL YOU KNOW, CALL OUT
AND FIGURE OUT WHAT KIND
OF CONDITION SOMEBODY FROM THE
CITY WAS ABLE TO CALL AND THEY
CALLED ME RIGHT BACK AND SAID
OH OOPS, MISTAKE.
WELL, WE&apos;LL DO WELL.
&gt;&gt; OOPS IT&apos;S THREE MONTHS LATER
AND YOU STILL HAVE TO COME BY
TO SCRAPE THE PAINT THE LEAD
PAINT THAT&apos;S PEELING OFF THE
SIDE OF THE HOUSE THAT MR.
FEDERAL INSPECTOR TOLD ME TO
DO.
THAT&apos;S ANOTHER THING I WANT TO
BRING UP IS WE SHOULD UPDATE
OUR CODE OF INSPECTIONS BECAUSE
THERE&apos;S A LOT OF SAFETY ISSUES.
CITY INSPECTIONS LET PASS AND
THERE&apos;S INCONSISTENCIES WITH
STATE AND FEDERAL GUIDELINES
THAT MAKE THINGS LIKE GETTING
HOUSING VOUCHERS MORE DIFFICULT
TO BE ACCEPTED.
&gt;&gt; THANK YOU.
THANK YOU
.
&gt;&gt; YOUR THIRD WARD, MISS GRANT.
THANKS FOR EVERYTHING.
I PUT ABOUT A THOUSAND DOORS IN
THE LAST WEEK FOR ELECTION
RELATED STUFF AND SOME OF THESE
COMMENTS ABOUT I MEAN IT&apos;S
REALLY SPEAK TO ME ACTUALLY THE
STUDENT RUNNERS NEED YOUR
DELIBERATELY TARGETED STUDENT
AREAS.
THEY NEED YOUR LEADERSHIP.
THEY NEED YOUR PROTECTION BE
AND WHAT THEY&apos;RE SAYING AND I
AS A HOMEOWNER IN THE THIRD
WARD I CAN TEST THEY&apos;RE NOT
ASKING FOR MUCH.
THE LANDLORDS NEED TO DO THEIR
JOB ON MAINTENANCE.
THAT REALLY SPEAKS TO ME AND
I&apos;D LIKE TO THANK YOU GUYS FOR
SPEAKING UP.
THANK YOU.
THERE ANYONE ELSE LIKE TO SPEAK
IN PUBLIC AT THIS PUBLIC
HEARING
?
&gt;&gt; THANK YOU.
BYE BYE.
I TEND TO DO I TEND TO ROLL
THROUGH PEOPLE IN IN HOUSE AND
THEN KICK IT OVER.
HI MY NAME IS NATHAN CHESTERMAN
AND I&apos;VE LIVED IN ANN ARBOR FOR
ABOUT EIGHT YEARS, MOST OF THEM
AS A RENTER.
I&apos;M HERE TONIGHT TO URGE YOU TO
PASS RIGHT TO RENEW AND
RELOCATION ASSISTANCE PAYMENTS
AS A RENTER I CAN SAY WITH 100
PERCENT CERTAINTY THAT IT TO
EXPERIENCE NOT RENEWAL.
ONE MINUTE YOU FEEL SECURE IN
YOUR HOME, THE NEXT YOU FEEL
COMPLETELY DESTABILIZED.
I SHARED WITH YOU ALL AT A
RECENT CITY COUNCIL MEETING
THAT LAST SPRING I AM ON MY
LANDLORDS TO RENEW MY LEASE AND
THEY TOLD ME
AT LEAST MY HOUSE
TO SOMEONE ELSE AND THAT I HAVE
TO VACATE MY HOME.
THEY GAVE ME NO REASON FOR NOT
RENEWAL BECAUSE THEY WEREN&apos;T
REQUIRED TO.
THEY GAVE ME ABSOLUTELY NOTHING
TO OFFSET THE COST OF MY MOVE
BECAUSE WHY WOULD THEY IF THEY
WEREN&apos;T REQUIRED TO END UP
SPENDING CLOSE TO TWO MONTHS
RENT MOVING TO A NEW APARTMENT
WHICH IS EXACTLY WHAT THIS
LEGISLATION WOULD PROMISE TO
TENANTS WHO EXPERIENCE
SITUATIONS SIMILAR TO MINE.
I&apos;VE SEEN LANDLORDS EMAILS TO
CITY COUNCIL THROUGH REQUEST.
THEY&apos;RE SAYING THAT YOU HAVE TO
DELAY THE ORDINANCE BECAUSE
THEY HAVEN&apos;T BEEN CONSULTED
ENOUGH BUT BASED ON THE VOLUME
OF EMAILS I THINK THEY&apos;VE MADE
THEMSELVES HEARD THEY&apos;RE
CLAIMING TO SPEAK FOR THE QUOTE
SILENT MAJORITY OF NON STUDENT
RENTERS OR STUDENTS WHO HAVEN&apos;T
MOVED TO TOWN YET SAYING THAT
WE&apos;D RATHER SHOP IN AN
UNREGULATED HOUSING MARKET AND
I CALL YES, NOBODY WANTS TO BE
THROWN OUT OF THEIR HOME FOR NO
APPARENT REASON.
NOBODY WANTS TO RECEIVE AN
EMAIL A MONTH AND A HALF OR
EVEN LESS AFTER THEY MOVE INTO
A NEW PLACE THAT SAYS COMMIT TO
RENEWING YOUR LEASE IN THE NEXT
THREE DAYS WE&apos;LL LOSE YOUR SPOT
ON A WAIT LIST.
NOBODY WANTS TO LIVE IN FEAR
THAT THE LANDLORD WILL
RETALIATE AGAINST THEM JUST FOR
ASKING FOR REPAIRS.
LANDLORDS SAY THEY LOVE
RENEWALS BUT WE&apos;VE MULTIPLE
DOCUMENTED CASES LIKE MINE.
SO IT SEEMS THAT WHAT THEY
REALLY LOVE IS NOT BEING HELD
ACCOUNTABLE.
SO WE NEED RIGHT TO RENEW
BECAUSE IT&apos;S TIME THAT WE HELD
TO ACCOUNT THEIR BRAZEN POWER
TRIPPING BEHAVIOR HAS GOTTEN
REALLY OUT OF HAND.
IT NEEDS TO BE REINED IN AND
THIS ISN&apos;T JUST ABOUT
PROTECTING STUDENTS.
I AM NOT A STUDENT AND FIFTY
FOUR PERCENT OF RESIDENTS IN
THE MOST RECENT CENSUS ARE OUR
RENTERS HERE AND EVERY ONE
OF US DESERVES PROTECTION FROM
ABUSIVE AND EXTRACTIVE
LANDLORDS.
WE DON&apos;T CARE ABOUT OUR
WELL-BEING.
I KNOW THAT GOOGLE AND
YELLOWPAGES FOR MANY OF THE
LANDLORDS HAVE BEEN IN TOUCH
WITH YOU ALL ARE RIFE WITH
REVIEWS SAYING HOW THE HEATING
DOESN&apos;T WORK UNRESPONSIVE THEY
ARE TO MAINTENANCE REQUESTS,
HOW THEY&apos;VE STOLEN SECURITY
DEPOSIT.
THESE LANDLORDS DO NOT SPEAK
FOR US ULTIMATELY GETTING THIS
LEGISLATION PASSED ISN&apos;T ABOUT
THIS SINGLE PROTECTION.
IT&apos;S ABOUT HAVING A CITY
COUNCIL THAT LEGISLATES BASED
ON THE NEEDS OF ITS
CONSTITUENTS.
THIS LEGISLATION IS A HUGE STEP
FORWARD AND I&apos;M REALLY GRATEFUL
THAT YOU&apos;RE ALL TAKING IT UP
FOR DEBATE AND VOTE THIS
EVENING AND I HOPE TO PASS IT
NONETHELESS IN A CITY WITH OVER
SIXTY THOUSAND RENTERS I THINK
IT&apos;S REALLY IMPORTANT THAT WE
HAVE A CITY COUNCIL WHO EVEN
THOUGH IT&apos;S MADE UP OF ALL
HOMEOWNERS IS PAYING ATTENTION
TO RENTERS NEEDS AND SO I&apos;D
REALLY LOVE TO SEE MORE
LEADERSHIP FROM YOU ON RENTERS
ISSUES MOVING FORWARD.
THANK YOU.
IS THERE ANYONE ELSE IN HOUSE
WHO&apos;D LIKE TO SPEAK AT THIS
PUBLIC HEARING?
&gt;&gt; MISS BOUDREAU, IS THERE
ANYONE ONLINE WHO&apos;D LIKE TO
SPEAK AT THIS PUBLIC HEARING?
WE DO HAVE A FEW CALLERS ON THE
LINE.
ADAM GOODMAN, YOU HAVE A
COMMENT JUST SAY THAT I FULLY
SUPPORT THIS.
I THINK YOU SHOULD PASS IT
TONIGHT.
THAT POINT WHAT CONCERNS ME I
GUESS IS WHAT ARE YOU WHAT ARE
YOU ALL GOING TO DO NEXT
BECAUSE I YOU KNOW, I&apos;LL BE
HONEST, I&apos;M NOT SURE IF THIS IS
GOING TO DO THAT MUCH GOOD FOR
OUR COMMUNITY OR SOLVE THAT
MANY PROBLEMS.
&gt;&gt; THE EARLY LEASING ORDINANCE
AND RICHARD IN FOCUS ON
ALLOWING EXISTING TENANTS
REALLY THAT&apos;S GOOD.
BUT I ALSO THINK WE NEED TO
SUPPORT PEOPLE WHO ARE MOVING
TO TOWN OR WHO NEED TO CHANGE
THEIR ARRANGEMENTS FOR WHATEVER
REASON WHEN I WAS A STUDENT I
BASICALLY EVERY YEAR AND I
DON&apos;T THINK THIS ORDINANCE IS
GOING TO PARTICULARLY HELP
FOLKS IN THAT SITUATION AND I
THINK THAT, YOU KNOW, WAYS THAT
LANDLORDS ARE EXPLOITING
LOOPHOLES IN THE EARLY LEASING
ORDINANCE MIGHT ACTUALLY BE
MAKING THINGS WORSE, NOT BETTER
BECAUSE THEY&apos;RE COMMANDING
FOLKS TO BE ON A WAIT LIST
INSTEAD OF AT LEAST YOU SIGNED
A LEASE POLICE RENT.
SO I&apos;M ALL OF THESE ORDINANCES
THAT YOU&apos;RE WORKING ON FOR
TENNIS RIGHTS ARE TREATING
SYMPTOMS OF THE PROBLEM AND THE
TRUE CAUSE IS THAT WE HAVE
MASSIVELY LESS HOUSING IN TOWN
RECENTLY FROM STATE COLLEGE,
PENNSYLVANIA WHICH WHICH IT WAS
WHILE THE CITY LEADERSHIP WERE
CONCERNED THAT THEY WERE
BUILDING TOO MUCH HOUSING IN
THE CITY IN ITS INFINITE WISDOM
WAS LOOKING AT THE PROBLEMS
THEY WERE HAVING.
VACANCY RATES WERE TAKING UP A
LITTLE BIT.
LANDLORDS WERE ACTUALLY HAVING
TO COMPETE WITH EACH OTHER TO
ATTRACT TENANTS.
THE I THINK A LOT OF FOLKS IN
ANN ARBOR WOULD DO UNSPEAKABLE
THINGS FOR OUR COMMUNITY TO
HAVE THAT SORT OF SITUATION.
SO THAT&apos;S WHERE WE HAVE TO GET
BUT OF COURSE EVEN IN THE BEST
CASE SCENARIO WE&apos;LL TAKE A VERY
LONG TIME TO BUILD ENOUGH
HOUSING TO BEGIN TO PRACTICE
PRACTICE BALANCE.
SO YES, TO ABSOLUTELY BE TAKING
ACTIONS LIKE FOR TRAINING
TONIGHT TO MAKE THINGS MORE
EQUITABLE AND TIME.
BUT HERE&apos;S THE KEY PART BECAUSE
WE ARE TREATING THE SYMPTOMS
RATHER THAN THE ROOT CAUSE YOU
HAVE TO ASSUME THAT LANDLORDS
ARE GOING TO FIND LOOPHOLES TO
CIRCUMVENT THIS ORDINANCE OR
JUST FIND OTHER WAYS TO SCREW
THE TENANTS TO PARTICIPATE.
BUT CELEBRATE BECAUSE TOMORROW
YOU NEED TO START THINKING
ABOUT THE WAYS YOU ARE GOING TO
CONTINUE WORKING TO PROTECT
TENANTS IN THE CITY.
THIS ORDINANCE IS NOT GOING TO
BE ENOUGH.
THE WORK WILL NOT BE DONE
ANYTIME SOON IF EVER.
AND AND OF COURSE ALSO PLEASE
DO EVERYTHING YOU CAN TO
SUPPORT BUILDING LOTS OF NEW
HOUSING IN ANN ARBOR BECAUSE
THAT&apos;S THE WAY THAT WE
EVENTUALLY GET OUT OF THIS.
&gt;&gt; THANK YOU.
THANK YOU CALLER.
THE PHONE NUMBER AND AGAIN FIVE
THREE FOUR STAR SIX TIME YOUR
CALL GO AHEAD.
AND THIS IS TOM STOLLBERG AGAIN
ONE OF THE HATHI WHERE THE
LANDLORD AND OUT OF RESPECT FOR
ONE OF THE EARLY CALLERS SAID
ABOUT NOT SPEAKING NOT SPEAKING
FOR TENANTS.
I WON&apos;T I WON&apos;T SPEAK ABOUT ANY
OF THE DETAILS.
I&apos;M SPEAKING JUST FOR MYSELF,
NOT FOR ANY THE LANDLORD THAT&apos;S
THE TENANTS BOTH SUPPORT AND
PERHAPS THIS ITEM TONIGHT WE
SUPPORT OUR POWERED POSITION
PEOPLE THE TENANTS THAT WHO
NEED CITY GOVERNMENT TO WORK
FOR THEM.
&gt;&gt; THERE MAY BE SOME PROBLEMS
WITH THIS THAT WILL CROP UP.
I WOULD BE SURPRISED IF THEY DO
.
BUT OVERALL I&apos;D LIKE TO SEE
CITY COUNCIL SUPPORT OVER HALF
THE RESIDENTS WHO ARE IN A
LOWER POSITION.
AS I SAID EARLIER THAT WILL DO
ON IT.
BUT I THINK IF YOU&apos;RE NOT PART
ELECTIONS THAT IS ALSO
SUPPORTING OUR TENANTS MANY
MORE STUDENTS WHO ARE
DISENFRANCHIZED BY THE CURRENT
SYSTEM OF ESSENTIALLY ELECTING
OUR COUNCIL MAYOR.
YOU KNOW, THANK YOU VERY MUCH
BUT THANK YOU
MAYOR.
I DON&apos;T HAVE ANY OTHER CALLERS
ON THE LINE WITH THEIR HANDS UP
ONE MORE SHALL I USE YOUR
COMMENT RIGHT NOW?
DON&apos;T HAVE ANYTHING I WANT TO
SAY ON THE TOPIC BUT I SUPPORT
THE RIGHT TO RENEW.
&gt;&gt; PLEASE PASS IT TONIGHT.
THANK YOU.
&gt;&gt; IS THERE ANYONE ELSE IN
HOUSE OR ONLINE WHO&apos;D LIKE TO
SPEAK AT THIS PUBLIC HEARING
THE PHONE NUMBER ENDING IN SIX
SO FAR.
DO YOU HAVE A COMMENT?
SORRY DID I DO I SPEAK ABOUT
ONE MEETING BETWEEN I REALLY
WAS HOW WE ALL KNOW THAT IN
PARTICULAR THE GREAT IS MORE
YOU THAN CANTOR COMING IN AND
THOSE VOICES ARE HEARD.
SO THIS IS A BIG STEP FORWARD
FOR ENTERTAINMENT AND
ESPECIALLY THIS AND THE ONE
OTHER REMEMBER AND HATE RIGHTS
ARE HUMAN RIGHTS.
HUMAN RIGHTS IF YOU WANT TO BE
BE LEADERS ARE REPRESENTING THE
IDIOTS AND SO THIS IS TAKING SO
LONG TO CORRECT THAT.
&gt;&gt; THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
THANK YOU
.
CALLER WITH THE PHONE NUMBER
ENDING IN ZERO SIX SEVEN, DO
YOU HAVE A COMMENT FROM STAR
SIX TO YOUR PHONE?
&gt;&gt; GO AHEAD CARDIOVASCULAR.
I&apos;M A THIRD YEAR UNDERGRADUATE
STUDENT AT THE UNIVERSITY
OF MICHIGAN AND I&apos;M HERE
REPRESENTING THE HEAD
OF STUDENT GOVERNMENT AND I&apos;M
THE SPEAKER OF THE TWELVE
FEDERAL STUDENT GOVERNMENT
ASSEMBLY.
&gt;&gt; I&apos;M HERE AGAINST OUR RIGHT
TO RENEW IT AND HOW WE BENEFIT
STUDENTS.
I THINK I MEANT A LOT OF MY
COMMENTS BEFORE AND A LOT
OF SPEAKERS PUT IT MORE
ELOQUENTLY THAN I CAN.
BUT I THINK THAT STUDENTS IN
LARGE PART THE VAST MAJORITY
OF STUDENTS I WOULD SAY SUPPORT
BETWEEN YOU AND WE HAVE GOTTEN
MASSIVE SUPPORT FROM THE
STUDENT BODY.
WE SUPPORT OUR RIGHT TO RENEW I
MEAN WE HAVEN&apos;T HEARD A SINGLE
BAD THING IN REGARDS TO THE
YELLOW OR EVEN BETTER WHEN YOU
ARE ON TOP OF IT.
AND I THINK THAT NUMEROUS TIMES
WE HEAR HORROR STORIES ON AN
UNDERGRADUATE AND GRADUATE ON
HOW L&apos;AMOUR&apos;S IS PRESENT AND
NOT GIVING THEM APPROPRIATE
TIME TO RENEW AND NOT
REFUNDABLE DEPOSIT AND ALL
THESE THINGS AND I THINK EVEN
THROUGH EMPIRICAL METHODS LIKE
SURVEY THAT YOU CONDUCTED AND
EVEN CSG WE GOT THAT MANY
VOTERS FELT PRESSURED TO RENEW
THE LEASE AND FELT PRESSURED TO
SPEND MONEY TO PUT THEIR MONEY
TOWARDS NONREFUNDABLE DEPOSIT
AND OTHER THINGS THAT I THINK
SHOULD NOT BE ALLOWED ON BEHALF
OF ICAC AND LIKE THIS IN
GENERAL I THINK IT IS RIGHT NOW
I JUST HAVE MINIMAL POWER AND A
LOT OF LANDLORDS ACROSS OUR
BORDERS WHATEVER FLOATS WE
CAN&apos;T AFFORD STUDENTS LIKE ME
AS WE KNEW EARLIER THIS WEEK I
THINK IT NEEDS TO BE WRITTEN.
YOU NEED TO PASS THIS MEETING
AND I HOPE
ALL OF YOU GET SOME
THANK YOU CARLA WITH THE PHONE
NUMBER WRITING IN FOUR ZERO
FOUR.
DO YOU HAVE A COMMENT?
&gt;&gt; HELLO.
I&apos;M A RESIDENT OF WARD ONE AND
I&apos;VE BEEN A RENTER IN ANN ARBOR
FOR THE PAST FOUR YEARS.
I&apos;VE BEEN FORTUNATE ENOUGH TO
HAVE BEEN OFFERED TIMELY
RENEWAL AND TO LIVE IN THE SAME
APARTMENT WITH THE TIME THIS
HAS OFFERED ME TO AND IT&apos;S
BENEFICIAL FOR MY LANDLORD AS
WELL.
I WOULD NOT HAD A BIG
DEPARTMENT FOUR YEARS DESPITE
SOME CLAIMS THIS IS NOT
PREVENTED BY LANDLORD FROM
MAKING NECESSARY REPAIRS TO MY
APARTMENT AND ENSURING A SAFE
LIVING AS WE FIRST TONIGHT.
THIS IS NOT THE CASE FOR EVERY
RENTER DEBILITY, RELIABILITY
AND LANDLORD ACCOUNTABILITY
SHOULD NOT BE RARE QUALITY FOR
RENTING.
IT SHOULD BE INSURED FOR ALL
RENTERS.
THE RIGHT FOR NEW ORDINANCE
WILL ENSURE THAT.
I WOULD ALSO LIKE TO ADDRESS
CLAIMS THAT ONLY A SELECT
NUMBER OF GRADUATE STUDENTS ARE
BACKING THIS ORDINANCE.
WELL IT&apos;S TRUE THAT THIS EFFORT
HAS BEEN SPEARHEADED BY A GROUP
OF COMMUNITY ACTIVISTS, A
GRADUATE STUDENTS.
THIS GROUP HAS WORKED
INCREDIBLY HARD TO REACH OUT TO
THE POPULATION OF ANN ARBOR.
THEY BEGAN WORK ON THIS
ORDINANCE A YEAR AGO.
I WAS ONE OF THE MANY RENTERS
IN OUR FIRST HOME TO WHOM THEY
REACHED OUT AND THROUGH THEIR
EFFORTS I WAS ABLE TO EDUCATE
MYSELF ON THIS ORDINANCE AND
MAKE THE INFORMED DECISION TO
SUPPORT IT THAN ANYONE IN THIS
ROOM WHO HAS HAD THE SAME
OPPORTUNITY AND AMOUNT OF TIME
TO LEARN ABOUT ORDINANCE.
AND I HOPE THAT THE CITY
COUNCIL WILL VOTE TO PASS THIS
ORDINANCE AND CONTINUE TO WORK
IN THE FUTURE.
&gt;&gt; THANK YOU.
THANK YOU
.
LUIS VASQUEZ, DO YOU HAVE A
COMMENT BY THE RESPONSE GOES
MORE LIKE THIS JUST POINTS
TOWARDS COUNCIL MAKING
DECISIONS ALONG WITH THE
PLANNING PERMISSION TO INCREASE
THE NUMBER OF HOUSING UNITS
THAT WE BUILD IN ANN ARBOR IN
THE NEXT FEW YEARS.
&gt;&gt; THANKS.
GOOD NIGHT.
THANK YOU
, MAYOR.
&gt;&gt; THERE ARE NO OTHER CALLERS
WITH THEIR HANDS UP.
IS THERE ANYONE ELSE LIKE TO
SPEAK AT THIS PUBLIC HEARING
?
&gt;&gt; SEE NO ON THIS PUBLIC
HEARING IS CLOSED.
WE HAVE BEFORE US THE REGULAR
SESSION MEETING MINUTES
OF SEPTEMBER NINETEEN TWENTY
TWENTY TWO MAY HAVE A MOTION
PLEASE TO APPROVE THESE MINUTES
BY COUNCIL MEMBER FOR DENHA
SECOND BY COUNCIL MEMBER MALAWI
DISCUSSION PLEASE OF THE
MINUTES ON FAVOR POSED MINUTES
ARE APPROVED BE1 AN ORDINANCE
TO AMEND SECTION EIGHT FIVE
THREE ZERO AND ADD SECTION
EIGHT FIVE THREE ONE TO CHAPTER
ONE OF FIVE HOUSING CODE OF
TITLE EIGHT OF THE UNIVERSITY
CODE MOVE BY COUNCIL MEMBER
NELSON SABAI KATSUO PER DENHA
DISCUSSION PLEASE OF BE1
COUNCIL MEMBER NELSON.
&gt;&gt; THANK YOU I I APPRECIATE THE
OUTPOURING OF SUPPORT TONIGHT
FOR THIS MATTER ON AS MANY
PEOPLE KNOW I HAVE BEEN TALKING
ABOUT THIS FOR A VERY LONG
TIME.
IT WAS FIRST SUGGESTED TO ME BY
LEADERSHIP FROM GETO THEY
DESERVE THE CREDIT FOR RAISING
THE VISIBILITY OF THIS ISSUE.
I THERE&apos;S THERE&apos;S A LOT THAT
COULD BE SAID ABOUT THIS
ORDINANCE.
I&apos;VE SPENT A WHOLE LOT OF TIME
SORT OF TRYING TO EXPLAIN TO
PEOPLE HOW IMPORTANT THIS WAS
IN THE LAST YEAR.
I&apos;M GLAD TO SEE IT FINALLY
HAPPENED.
I SHARE THAT DISAPPOINTMENT
OF MANY THAT WE MANAGED TO TIME
IT TO MISS APPLICABILITY TO THE
BULK OF STUDENT RENTAL LEASES
BY WHAT A MONTH?
LE OF MONTHS I GUESS THIS
HAS BEEN AN ONGOING
CONVERSATION.
I AM REALLY GLAD TO SEE IT MOVE
FORWARD.
I I URGE COMMUNITY MEMBERS WHO
CARE ABOUT TENANTS RIGHTS TO
PAY ATTENTION TO WHAT HAPPENS
IN THE NEXT TEN MONTHS BEFORE
THE NEXT LEASING CYCLE.
&gt;&gt; THE LAST TIME WE PASSED AN
ORDINANCE THAT HAD A GREATER
EFFECT SOME MONTHS IN THE
FUTURE IT WAS AMENDED BEFORE IT
COULD HAVE THAT EFFECT.
SO IT&apos;S TRUE THAT THERE IS MUCH
WORK STILL TO BE DONE IN
PARTICULARLY GRATEFUL TO THE
SPEAKER WHO WHO MENTIONED
HAVING VISITED A LOT OF DOORS
IN STUDENT NEIGHBORHOODS I WHEN
WHEN THE EARLY LEASING
ORDINANCE WAS PASSED AND I WAS
WORRIED ABOUT ON A POTENTIAL
LACK OF AWARENESS AROUND THAT
ORDINANCE I ACTUALLY PASSED
AROUND LEAFLETS IN STUDENT
NEIGHBORHOODS AND I I FELT LIKE
I WAS IN DANGER IN SOME PLACES
TRYING TO CLIMB UP STOOPS AND
PORCHES.
I WAS ALARMED LIKE THEY WERE
LIKE BLOCKS AND NEIGHBORHOODS
OF THE CITY THAT I HADN&apos;T
HADN&apos;T HAD REASON TO VISIT
BEFORE.
AND I I LOOK FORWARD TO A LOT
MORE CONVERSATIONS IN THE
FUTURE ABOUT WHAT WE CAN DO TO
PAY CLOSER ATTENTION TO WHAT
TENANTS NEED NEEDS ARE IN THIS
COMMUNITY.
SO I I LOOK FORWARD TO SEEING
THIS ORDINANCE PASSED.
I EXPECT IT TO PASS BASED ON
THE LONG LIST OF CO-SPONSORS
AND I THANK EVERYONE FOR
PUSHING PUSHING THIS ELECTED
BODY TO THINK ABOUT IT, THINK
ABOUT HOUSING IN A DIFFERENT
WAY THAN PROBABLY WE TYPICALLY
DO.
&gt;&gt; THANK YOU
COUNTS I&apos;M AMAWI
THANK YOU.
BUT AGAIN BY THE LIST
OF CO-SPONSORS A PRETTY SAFE
BET THAT THIS IS GOING TO PASS
TONIGHT.
THERE HAS BEEN CONCERN RAISED
BY LANDLORDS WHO SAY THEY
HAVEN&apos;T BEEN AT THE TABLE AS
MUCH WITH THE LENDERS
COMMISSION IN DRAFTING THIS
ORDINANCE CHANGE AND OTHERS AS
LIKE THE EARLY LEASING
ORDINANCE AND THAT WILL BE
ARGUED AS TO WHAT DEGREE THEY
HAVE BEEN INVOLVED IN.
BUT THIS REENTRIES COMMISSION
MOVES FORWARD AND DOES MORE
THAT THE VOICES OF THE
LANDLORDS WILL BE INCLUDED AND
BE AT THE TABLE.
I THINK IT&apos;S IMPORTANT FOR ALL
PARTIES TO BE REPRESENTED IN
NEGOTIATIONS AND I&apos;LL SAY THIS
BECAUSE IT&apos;S ON THE TIP OF MY
TONGUE ALL THE TIME IN MANY
CASES AS A PALESTINIAN I
BELIEVE PALESTINIANS SHOULD BE
PRESENT AT THE TABLE WHEN
DISCUSSING THEIR FUTURE.
SO I SEE THIS IN MANY DIFFERENT
FACETS AND THIS IS ANOTHER ONE
THIS AT THE FIRST READING I
WASN&apos;T SURE WHETHER I WAS GOING
TO SUPPORT IT OR NOT AT THE
SECOND READING BUT AFTER
LOOKING AT IT I DON&apos;T HAVE
GREAT CAUSE TO OBJECT TO THIS.
UH, THERE ARE REMEDIES AND IN
IT THAT WILL TAKE CARE OF THE
CONCERNS THAT HAVE BEEN RAISED
GOOD CAUSE IT WILL BE ARGUED
ABOUT IN THE REILICH RELOCATION
ASSISTANCE ALSO IS A GOOD
REMEDY FOR FOR INSTANCES WHERE
PEOPLE HAVE BEEN UNJUSTLY
JUSTIFIED BE TREATED.
SO YOU KNOW THERE&apos;S A GREAT
POWER IMBALANCE.
THERE IS HOUSING INSECURITIES
FOR THOUSANDS OF PEOPLE AND
THESE ARE REAL THREATS AND REAL
ISSUES THAT PEOPLE ARE DEALING
WITH.
AND WHEN YOU&apos;RE HOUSING
INSECURE I&apos;M NOT SURE YOU CAN
MANAGE TO DEAL WITH MUCH ELSE
IN LIFE.
SO I THINK IT&apos;S IT&apos;S IMPORTANT
TO PASS THIS HERE TONIGHT AND I
DON&apos;T SEE A REASON TO SUPPORT
IT AND I APPRECIATE EVERYONE&apos;S
WORK ON THIS AND I HOPE THE
WORK CAN CONTINUE IMPROVING THE
LIVES OF RENTERS AND EVERYBODY
ELSE.
THANK YOU.
COUNCIL MEMBER OF DENHA.
THANK YOU MAYOR.
I WANT TO ECHO SOME THANKS TO
THE COMMUNITY ACTIVISTS HERE IN
THE ROOM AND THOSE WATCHING AT
HOME AND REALLY EVERYONE HAS
PARTICIPATED IN THIS PROCESS
THROUGHOUT AS AS HAS BEEN
MENTIONED.
SHE BROUGHT THIS TO US
INITIALLY AND HAD MEETINGS WITH
US ABOUT THIS CONCEPT BEFORE
RELEASING ORDINANCE EVEN AND SO
THIS IS A LONG TIME COMING.
I DO WANT TO THANK FOLKS FOR
THEIR FOR THEIR PATIENCE.
I&apos;M WORKING THROUGH SOME OF IT.
I KNOW IT HAS TAKEN LONGER THAN
MANY FOLKS HAVE WANTED.
I DO WANT TO BRIEFLY ADDRESS
BECAUSE BECAUSE I THINK I THINK
THERE IS MAYBE SOME CONFUSION
ABOUT IF THIS HAD BEEN ENACTED
A MONTH AGO OR A COUPLE
OF MONTHS AGO THAT IT MAY HAVE
IMPACTED LEASES THAT WERE
STARTING THIS FALL IS MY
UNDERSTANDING THROUGH THE
CONVERSATION THAT I&apos;VE HAD THAT
BECAUSE OF OUR CONTRACT LAW
HERE IN MICHIGAN WE WOULD HAVE
ACTUALLY HAD TO HAVE ENACTED
BEFORE ANY OF THOSE AGREEMENTS
WERE SIGNED AND SO IT LIKELY
WOULD HAVE NEEDED TO HAPPEN
MONTHS AND MONTHS AND MONTHS
AGO RATHER THAN RATHER THAN
JUST A COUPLE OF MONTHS AGO.
BUT THAT I DO HOPE THAT THAT WE
WE CAN PASS THIS TONIGHT.
I AGREE.
I THINK BASED ON THE LONG LIST
OF CO-SPONSORS, I HOPE THAT
WE&apos;RE NOT GOING TO HAVE ANY
SURPRISES.
BUT I ALSO WANT TO ACKNOWLEDGE
THAT I THINK THAT THIS IS JUST
ANOTHER STEP IN THE PROCESS
OF BALANCING THE INCREDIBLE
POWER IMBALANCE THAT EXISTS IN
THE COMMUNITY BETWEEN RENTERS
AND THEIR LANDLORDS.
I WILL ECHO THAT.
I DON&apos;T BELIEVE THAT AT ALL.
AND BOARDS ARE EVIL AND TRYING
TO TRYING TO DO WRONG BY OUR
TENANTS.
WE HAVE HEARD ACTUALLY FROM A
NUMBER OF LANDLORDS WHO WANTED
TO PARTICIPATE IN THIS PROCESS
WHO HELPED TO STRENGTHEN AND
WHO SUPPORT ITS PASSAGE.
WHAT I WHAT I HOPE WE DON&apos;T SEE
IS A LOT OF CONTINUED
EXPLOITATION OR EFFORTS TO
CREATE LOOPHOLES TO GET AROUND
THE INTENT OF THE ORDINANCE.
I IMAGINE THERE WILL BE SOME
AND WE WILL NEED TO CONTINUE AS
I MENTIONED LAST LAST MEETING
TO CONTINUE TO MAKE
IMPROVEMENTS TO OUR LOCAL LAWS
TO TO MAKE SURE THAT WE&apos;RE
PROTECTING OUR RESIDENTS AND
AND FINALLY I WILL ALSO SAY
THAT I JUST THINK THIS IS THE
REASON THAT WE CREATED THE
RENTERS COMMISSION.
WE KNOW THAT THERE IS A
DRAMATIC POWER IMBALANCE.
WE KNOW THAT WE NEEDED A
PROCESS FOR FOUR FOUR
ORDINANCES LIKE THIS AND OTHERS
TO COME TO US WITH RENTERS
VOICES BEING FRONT AND CENTER
AND SO I APPRECIATE AGAIN THE
CONTINUED ACTIVISM FROM FROM
OUR COMMUNITY GROUPS AND
COMMUNITY LEADERS.
BUT I ALSO HOPE THAT NOW WITH
THE RENTERS COMMISSION IN IN IN
THE PROCESS WE&apos;LL BE ABLE TO
HAVE A MORE FORMAL WAY
OF CONTINUING TO MOVE THESE
THESE ITEMS FORWARD SO THAT WE
CONTINUE TO MAKE IMPROVEMENTS.
THANK YOU FOR THE DISCUSSION
COUNCIL MAHINA JUST A FEW
REMARKS.
&gt;&gt; I THINK IT&apos;S GOTTEN SORT
OF IT SORT OF HAS COME TO BE
THAT IT&apos;S CONSIDERED
PROGRESSIVE TO INTERFERE IN
PRIVATE PARTY CONTRACTS AND
THAT&apos;S WHAT THIS BODY DOES.
YOU KNOW WE DID A THING A WHILE
BACK WE GOT RID OF BACKGROUND
CHECKS FOR RENTING AND I THINK
ALL THESE THINGS ARE COME FROM
COME FROM THE RIGHT PLACE TO
CREATE A SET OF TENANTS RIGHTS
AND OTHER EMPOWERMENT.
AND SO WE LOOKED AT REMOVING
BACKGROUND CHECKS.
WE&apos;VE LOOKED AT EARLY LEASING
ORDINANCE AND SOME OF THESE
THINGS HAVE YOU KNOW, THEY HAVE
GOOD GOALS BUT THEY HAVE
UNKNOWN OUTCOMES LIKE I&apos;VE BEEN
HEARD FOR MANY BUILDING OWNERS
THAT EARLY LEASING HAS PUT THEM
KIND OF IN NOT ONLY IN CONFLICT
PRIVATE HOUSING IN CONFLICT
WITH THE UNIVERSITY AS AN
EXAMPLE.
BUT WE WE&apos;VE CREATED YOU KNOW,
KIND OF OUT OF SYNC OUT
OF SYNCHRONOSS LEASING PATTERNS
WITH SAY INTERNATIONAL
UNDERGRAD STUDENTS AS AN
EXAMPLE.
AND SO WHEN I LOOK AT ALL THE
THINGS THAT WE DO, I&apos;M ALWAYS
ASKING MYSELF, YOU KNOW, WHAT
IS THE POTENTIAL FOR A POOR
OUTCOME FROM THIS FROM THIS AND
THAT&apos;S WHAT YOU HAVE TO LOOK
AT.
WE ONLY WANT TO IMPROVE THE LOT
OF EVERYONE IN OUR COMMUNITY
AND SO IF WE&apos;RE GOING TO DO
SOMETHING THAT&apos;S GOING TO MAKE
IT WORSE FOR ALL PARTIES
INVOLVED, CERTAINLY NOTHING
WORTH DOING.
I MEAN IT&apos;S JUST GOING TO
PROHIBIT WALK IN LEASING FOR
EXAMPLE.
&gt;&gt; IS IT GOING TO HAVE THE
POTENTIAL TO LOAD THE COURTS
WITH THE JUDGMENTS OF GOOD
CAUSE IT THE UNDEFINED GOOD
FAITH OFFER TO RENEW THAT LEADS
THE PENALTY PHASE OF THIS
ORDINANCE BASICALLY LEAVES IT
TO THE COURTS TO DECIDE WHAT
THAT DEFINITION OF GOOD FAITH
OFFERED REVIEW IS.
COULD THAT INCLUDE LIKE IT IS
OFTEN INCLUDED?
CAN IT YOU KNOW, SHOULD WE
DEFINE THAT SO THAT YOU KNOW,
GOOD FAITH MEANING HONESTY IN
THE CONDUCT AND WHAT IS THE
DEFINITION OF A RENEWAL OFFER?
I KNOW A LOT OF THE LARGE
BUILDING OWNERS AND LESSER&apos;S
HERE IN THIS TOWN THEY HAVE TO
ADJUST THEIR RENT GENERALLY
UPWARDS TO CREATE UPWARD
PRESSURE ON RENT AND THAT IS A
RESULT OF , YOU KNOW, OFTEN A
RESULT OF THE POLICIES AND
PRACTICES AT THIS VERY TABLE.
AND SO, YOU KNOW, WILL WE END
UP IN THE COURTS AGAIN WITH
PEOPLE SAYING HEY, GOOD FAITH
IS IN A 10 PERCENT INCREASE AND
THEN THEY WOULD GET IT AT THAT
POINT OF ARGUMENT?
WELL, IF YOU CAN&apos;T CONTROL YOUR
RENT YOURSELF EITHER IT&apos;S A OR
IS A LANDLORD AND HE ASKED THE
COURT TO CONTROL YOUR RENT.
IT&apos;S RENT CONTROL AND IT&apos;S
UNCONSTITUTIONAL IN THE STATE
OF MICHIGAN AND I&apos;M SORRY TO
SAY THAT BUT THAT&apos;S THE FACTS.
AND SO I&apos;M JUST I&apos;M CONCERNED
AT SOME OF THE VAGARIES THAT WE
INCLUDE IN THESE DEFINITIONS
AND WE LEAVE IT UP TO THE
COURTS TO DECIDE ARE NOT REALLY
,YOU KNOW, WORKING AS STRONGLY
IN THE INTEREST OF OF TENANTS
AS WE COULD.
AND SO I&apos;M I&apos;M STILL QUITE ON
THE FENCE ABOUT THIS AND LIKELY
WILL BE UNTIL MY NAME IS CALLED
FURTHER CONSERVER FROM LOEWY.
OH THANK YOU.
KNOW COUNCIL MEMBER HAYNER AVC
IS A LONE WOLF AT THIS TABLE
MANY, MANY TIMES BUT HEARING
HIM AND HERE IT IS HIS POINT
OF VIEW AND BEING THE DEVIL&apos;S
ADVOCATE I THINK DOES HELP THE
BODY COME TO A BETTER
CONCLUSION.
YOU DON&apos;T NEED TO AGREE WITH
BOTH HIS POSITIONS AND
UNDERSTAND TO MANY IF NOT ALL
BUT MANY THINGS.
BUT WE HAVE A POWER IMBALANCE
BETWEEN THE TENANT AND THE
LANDLORD.
WE&apos;RE CREATING A POWER
IMBALANCE AMONG LANDLORDS.
WE&apos;RE IN THIS ORDINANCE.
THE UNIVERSITY IS EXEMPT AND
YOU ALSO HAVE BIG BOX LANDLORDS
LIKE THE STANDARD WE&apos;RE GOING
TO BE VOTING ON SOMETHING HERE
LATER.
TWO HUNDRED FORTY FOUR UNITS
VS. YOUR WHAT YOU WOULD HAVE
YOU KNOW MOM AND POP TYPE
OF LANDLORDS WHO WHO HAVE BEEN
REACHING OUT TO US AND SAYING
WELL SLOW DOWN HERE ALL THESE
CHANGES HAVE UNINTENDED
CONSEQUENCES AND THEY DO BUT
YOU KNOW, I WON&apos;T BE HERE WHEN
THOSE UNINTENDED CONSEQUENCES
COME BACK AND MUCH OF THIS IS
GOING TO BE DECIDED IN IN THESE
AREAS OF POWER IMBALANCES IF
THINGS DO GO TO COURT SYSTEMS
THAT FAVORS PEOPLE WITH
RESOURCE IS WHICH HAPPEN TO BE
LANDLORDS AND THEN OF COURSE
WE&apos;RE MAKING THIS OTHER WE&apos;RE
PICKING FAVORITES WITH WITH WHO
THE LANDLORD IS AND SO MUCH
LARGER THE INVESTOR TYPES WILL
CONTINUE COUNSELING MAY NOT BE
AFFECTED BY THIS FURTHER
DISCUSSION.
CONSIDER SONG.
I THINK THE DISCUSSION IS
LEADING US TO OUR NEXT STEPS IN
THIS WORK WHICH IS SOMETHING
I&apos;VE TALKED TO COUNCIL MEMBER
DENHA ABOUT WHICH IS THE NEED
TO PUSH HER RIGHT TO COUNSEL.
SO IF WE FOLLOW THIS WORK IN
DETROIT THAT JUST PASSED THIS
THIS WAS A MULTI-YEAR EFFORT IN
COLLABORATION WITH FOUNDATIONS
,WE&apos;LL SEE DATA FROM WHERE
OTHER CITIES HAVE PASSED THIS
THESE SIMILAR EFFORTS SAN
FRANCISCO, WASHINGTON DC, NEW
YORK, CLEVELAND, PHILADELPHIA,
DENVER THAT LANDLORDS HAVE
ACCESS OVER 80 PERCENT
OF LANDLORDS GENERALLY HAVE
ACCESS TO LEGAL REPRESENTATION
AND EVICTION PROCEEDINGS VERSUS
TENANTS HAVE FIVE PERCENT
OF TENANTS HAVE ACCESS TO LEGAL
REPRESENTATION.
DETROIT FUTURE CITY HAS A
FANTASTIC KIND OF ONE PAGE
OVERVIEW BACK IN 2020 WHEN THEY
START ADVOCATED FOR FOR THIS IF
DETROIT CAN DO THIS SIMILARLY
TO HOW WE PUSHED UBI OR A
GUARANTEED INCOME HERE AND
THEY&apos;VE THEY&apos;VE PASSED THAT IN
DETROIT JUST RECENTLY IT&apos;D BE
GREAT IF WE COULD TAKE THE LEAD
HERE AND THEN IT WOULD BE ALSO
GREAT TO SEE HOW THIS WOULD BE
MOVED THROUGHOUT THE COUNTY.
LAST I CHECKED WE HAD 500 CASES
IN OUR EVICTION COURTS, SARAH,
WHICH WAS COVID EMERGENCY
RELIEF RENTAL ASSISTANCE
FUNDING ENDED IN JUNE.
THE HACLA WHICH IS OUR INTAKE
HOMELESS AND HOUSING INTAKE
LINE WENT DOWN IN JUNE WHERE WE
HAD 2000 CALLS WAITING
UNANSWERED.
&gt;&gt; WE DO KNOW THAT THERE ARE
FAMILIES WHO ARE STRUGGLING.
IT&apos;S NOT JUST STUDENTS, FOLKS
WHO ARE RENT BURDENED.
IF YOU LOOK AT THE COUNTY&apos;S
OPPORTUNITY INDEX WHERE YOU CAN
SEE EXTREME HOUSING BURDEN
WHICH IS THAT 50 PERCENT
OF YOUR INCOME EXISTS IN THE
COUNTY WE KNOW FOLKS ARE BORN
HERE IN ANN ARBOR THAT STARTS A
THIRTY PERCENT OF YOUR INCOME
AND IT&apos;S NOT JUST STUDENTS,
IT&apos;S FAMILIES.
RIGHT.
SO I THINK THE FOLKS WHO WORKED
ON THIS I REALLY, REALLY
ENCOURAGE YOU TO BRING THIS TO
THE COUNTY COMMISSIONERS
BRINGING IT TO OTHER
MUNICIPALITIES.
RENTERS DO WORK DO LIVE IN OUR
AND IN OUR TOWNSHIPS.
SOCIAL SERVICES ALSO WORK IN
OUR TOWNSHIPS.
SO MY REQUEST OF EVERYONE HERE
IS THAT WE THINK ABOUT THESE
NEXT STEPS WHEN IT COMES TO
LEGAL REPRESENTATION.
SPEAK TO MAP MICHIGAN ADVOCACY
PROJECT LEGAL SERVICES OF SOUTH
CENTRAL MICHIGAN.
THESE FOLKS HAVE BEEN DOING
THIS WORK LONG BEFORE THE
PANDEMIC AND ARE STRUGGLING
WITH TRYING TO REPRESENT FOLKS
NOW.
SO THANKS FOR THE DISCUSSION
CHOPS REMEMBER HAYNER WELL I
THINK I THINK IT&apos;S A GOOD
THANKS MR. MAYOR.
I THINK IT&apos;S A GOOD POINT HAS
BEEN MADE THAT THERE IS THERE
THIS HAS THE POTENTIAL TO FAVOR
ONE GROUP OF , YOU KNOW,
BUILDING OWNERS OVER ANOTHER OR
LANDLORDS OVER ANOTHER.
AND AGAIN, I&apos;M LOATHE TO USE
THAT TERM BECAUSE OF THEY ALL
ARE KIND OF VILE DEMONIZATION
OF THE LANDLORD HAS GONE ON
AROUND THIS CONVERSATION.
BUT WHEN YOU LOOK AT THE
PENALTY PHASE, THE RELOCATION
ASSISTANCE TWO MONTHS RENT SO
IMAGINE YOU&apos;RE SOMEBODY WHO HAS
A SINGLE HOME AND THEY THEY YOU
KNOW, THEY IT&apos;S A SINGLE DUPLEX
OR SOMETHING.
THEY RENT A COUPLE THOUSAND SO
THEY&apos;RE ON THE HOOK FOR A LOT.
NOW LET&apos;S SAY YOU&apos;RE A LARGE
CORPORATE STORE AND YOU HAVE
900 BEDS IN YOUR BUILDING AND
YOU WOULD HAPPILY WRITE A CHECK
FOR THREE THOUSAND DOLLARS OR
SOMETHING TO GET TO GET A
PROBLEMATIC TENANT OUT WITHOUT
EVEN BOTHERING FOR GOOD CAUSE
AND IT WOULD MEAN VERY LITTLE
TO THE BOTTOM LINE OF A VERY
LARGE CORPORATION OR THE
UNIVERSITY TO PAY THIS
RELOCATION ASSISTANCE WHERE IT
WOULD MEAN EVERYTHING TO A
SMALL LANDLORD.
AND SO IN THE PENALTY PHASE
OF THIS I THINK WE&apos;RE WE&apos;RE
MAKING A MISTAKE AND IF THE
ESSENCE OF RIGHT TO RENEW IS TO
PROVIDE STABILITY IN OUR
HOUSING MARKET, I THERE THERE&apos;S
THIS IS ONE APPROACH I&apos;M SURE
THERE&apos;S OTHER BUT I&apos;M OTHERS
BUT I&apos;M NOT SURE THAT WE&apos;VE
REALLY LOOKED AT ANY OTHERS.
I THINK THIS IS SORT
OF FOLLOWING A BIT OF A FORMULA
AFTER THE YOU KNOW, EARLY
LEASING ORDINANCE AND SO
AND
IT&apos;S WELL AND GOOD.
I SPOKE WITH COUNCILWOMAN
NELSON WHO KIND OF BROUGHT ALL
THIS FORWARD LAST YEAR ABOUT IT
AT LENGTH AND I THINK THAT IS
THE GOAL IS TO PROVIDE
STABILITY AND KIND OF REMOVE
SOME OF THE STIGMA WITH BEING A
RENTER IN OUR COMMUNITY AND
CLEARLY THIS IS GOING TO PASS.
BUT I THINK THAT THERE&apos;S I
THINK WE SHOULD BE ROUNDLY
LOOKING AT OTHER INNOVATIVE
WAYS TO DO THAT NOT NOT JUST BY
INTERFERING IN PRIVATE
CONTRACTS, FURTHER DISCUSSION
FROM MY PART I AM I&apos;M VERY
EXCITED ABOUT ABOUT THIS HAVING
BEEN BROUGHT FORWARD AND I
THINK THE RESIDENT COMMUNITY
MEMBER ACTIVISTS AND MEMBERS
OF COUNCIL HERE AND OF COURSE
IN THE RENTERS COMMISSION WHO
HAVE DONE A GREAT DEAL OF WORK
TO TO BRING THIS TO FRUITION,
THE PASSAGE OF RIGHT TO RENEW
IS GOING TO IMPROVE THE LIVES
OF THOUSANDS OF ANN ARBOR
RESIDENTS BOTH TODAY AND OVER
OVER THE YEARS TO COME.
IT&apos;S GOING TO IMPROVE THEIR
LIVES WITH PARTICULARITY WITH
RESPECT TO HOUSING STABILITY.
&gt;&gt; IT IS OF COURSE BUNDLED INTO
BEING A RENTER.
IS IS YOUR TENTATIVE STATUS THE
LANDLORD CONTROLS THE EFFECT
OF THE LEASE AND YOUR
OBLIGATION RATHER YOUR
OPPORTUNITY IS TO ACCEPT IT OR
NOT NOT ACCEPT IT AND THAT IS
AN ASYMMETRY AND THAT&apos;S AN
ASYMMETRY THAT WE&apos;RE WORKING
HERE TO ENGAGE TO THE BEST WE
CAN.
I DON&apos;T THINK THAT THIS THIS
PARTICULAR GENERATION IS
NECESSARILY PERFECT AND I DON&apos;T
THINK BUT I DO THINK THAT IT IS
GETTING US VERY MUCH IN THE
RIGHT DIRECTION AND I&apos;M EXCITED
ABOUT THE CHANGES THAT IT WILL
AFFECT.
IT HAS BEEN ASKED WHAT IS NEXT
AND I GUESS THAT&apos;S AN OPEN
QUESTION AND IT&apos;S ONE TO THAT
I&apos;M EXCITED ABOUT AND I GUESS I
WILL FOR MY PART BE LOOKING TO
THE RENTERS COMMISSION TO SEE
WHERE THEY NEXT BELIEVE THAT WE
HAVE AN OPPORTUNITY TO MAKE THE
LIVES OF OF COMMUNITY MEMBERS
HERE BETTER.
IT IS COMMISSIONER, I KNOW THAT
EXCITED, ENGAGED AND EAGER TO
TO TAKE ACTION AND I KNOW THAT
THAT IS THAT WE ARE ALL I
BELIEVE SIMILARLY EXCITED ABOUT
THE PROSPECT OF BEING
RESPONSIVE IN THIS AREA BECAUSE
IT&apos;S INCREDIBLY IMPORTANT AND
BECAUSE IT HAS NOT BEEN BECAUSE
ITS TIME HAS COME FOR THE
DISCUSSION.
&gt;&gt; ROLL CALL VOTE PLEASE.
I BELIEVE STARTING WITH COUNCIL
BRITISH
OUR DISH YES.
CUSTOMER GRISWOLD YES.
CUSTOMER SONG YES.
CUSTOMER GRAHAM YES.
CUSTOMER YES TAYLOR YES.
THAT&apos;S WHERE OUR YES CUSTOMER
AND ALSO YES CUSTOMER BREAKS
YES.
CUSTOMER ALLOWING YES CUSTOMER
HAYNER NO WASHING PERIOD C1
ANNOYED TO FEYENOORD IN CHAPTER
FIFTY FIVE UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT
CODE REZONING OF ONE HUNDRED
AND NINETY PARCELS THE WEST
STADION NORTH MAPLE AREA TO
TAKE ONE TRANSIT CORRIDOR
DISTRICT TO CITY INITIATED
REZONING MOVE BY KALFIN BUDISH
SECONDED BY COUNCIL NO HIGHER
DISCUSSION PLEASE OF SIWAN CALL
FOR BRITISH THANK YOU ER SO AS
YOU HAVE HEARD THIS ORDINANCE
PROPOSES TO REZONE 190 PART
PARCELS IN THE WEST STADIUM
BOULEVARD IN NORTH SOUTH MAPLE
ROAD AREA AS TAXI ONE TRANSIT
CORRIDOR DISTRICT.
THIS ORDINANCE IS A MAP
AMENDMENT.
IT AFFIRMS THAT THIS AREA IS
APPROPRIATE FOR DESIGNATION AS
A TRANSIT CORRIDOR BECAUSE IT
IS WELL SERVED BY BUSSES.
THERE ARE COMMERCIAL EMPLOYMENT
AND RECREATION CENTERS NEARBY
AND MORE RESIDENTS AND IMPROVED
WALKABILITY WOULD CONTRIBUTE TO
THE FLOURISHING OF THOSE
BUSINESSES.
THE TAXI ONE DESIGNATION IS THE
PRODUCT OF EXTENSIVE POLITICAL
PUBLIC PARTICIPATION THAT WENT
INTO THE DEVELOPMENT OF NO
FEWER THAN SEVEN ELEMENTS
OF THE CITY&apos;S CURRENT
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN DOCUMENTS
INCLUDING THE LAND USE ELEMENT
SOUTH STATE STREET CORRIDOR
ELEMENT, THE REIMAGINED
WASHTENAW DOCUMENT AND MORE
EXTENDING ONE TO NEW TO THIS
NEW GEOGRAPHIC AREA MEANS THAT
WE ARE CATCHING UP ON OUR
EXISTING PLANS NOT THAT WE ARE
JUMPING THE GUN ON THE UPCOMING
COMPREHENSIVE PLANNING PROCESS
.
NOW WHAT DOES TAKE ONE ZONING
HOPE TO ACCOMPLISH?
&gt;&gt; WE HOPE TO ENABLE MORE
PEOPLE TO LIVE IN ANN ARBOR IN
MULTIFAMILY MARKET HOUSING
WITHIN WALKING DISTANCE
OF GROCERY STORES AND BUS
ROUTES.
WE HOPE TO FACILITATE A
MUTUALLY SUPPORTIVE
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN LAND USE
AND TRAFFIC THAT ARE IN TRANSIT
SO IT IS PUZZLING TO ME TO HEAR
PEOPLE LABEL TO SEE ONE A ONE
SIZE FITS ALL MODEL HEIGHT
MXIMA INTEC ONE ADJUST
DEPENDING ON HOW CLOSE THEY ARE
TO RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
HOW WOULD THAT SELF ADJUSTING
MECHANISM PLAY OUT ON W STADIUM
MAPLE ROAD ALMOST ALL THE LAND
NORTHEAST OF STADIUM WOULD BE
LIMITED TO 75 FOOT TALL AND
EXCUSE ME SIX STOREY BUILDINGS.
THERE WOULD BE SOME ELEVEN
STOREY OR ONE HUNDRED AND
TWENTY FOOT BUILDINGS
PERMISSABLE CLOSER TO THE
STREET IN THE WESTGATE SHOPPING
MALL AND IN THE AREA BETWEEN
MAPLE AND STADIUM.
BUT FOR THE MOST PART TAKE ONE.
ZONING WILL NOT MAKE A DRAMATIC
CHANGE WITH RESPECT TO HEIGHT
CURRENT ZONING NOW ALLOWS FOR
STOREY RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT
ON ROUGHLY TWO THIRDS OF THESE
190 PARCELS WE&apos;VE HEARD
CONCERNS THAT THE PROMISE
OF GREATER DENSITY ATTRACTS
DEVELOPERS AND THAT WE CAN
EXPECT DISPLACEMENT OF LOCAL
BUSINESSES AS LANDLORDS SELL
THE LEASES OUT FROM UNDER THEM
EXISTING LANDLORDS FOR
COMMERCIAL PROPERTIES IN THIS
AREA ARE CURRENTLY USING ONLY
25 PERCENT OF THE SQUARE
FOOTAGE THAT CURRENT ZONING
ALLOWS.
THIS MEANS THAT IF EXCESS
DENSITY REALLY WERE SUCH A HOT
COMMODITY WE WOULD ALREADY SEE
LANDLORDS SELLING OUT SMALL
BUSINESSES TO TURN A PROFIT.
I TALKED A LOT ABOUT WHAT HE
ONE ENCOURAGES BUT I WOULD SAY
UNDER AND I THERE YOU ARE.
I&apos;M COOL.
I&apos;LL TALK LATER ABOUT WHAT IT
PROHIBITS COUNCILMAN GRISWOLD,
I PROVIDED QUESTIONS THIS
MORNING FOR A STAFF
INTRODUCTION.
&gt;&gt; OH, THANK YOU, MR. TONY
.
MR. MAYOR, WE HAVE RAYMOND HAS
AVAILABLE FOR THIS ITEM.
I&apos;M SORRY BRET LAINER
.
MR. LEONARD IS JOINING US ON
ZOOME
EVENING COUNCIL.
&gt;&gt; I DO HAVE A SERIES
OF QUESTIONS THAT I HAPPY TO
COVER LATE LAST WEEK A
CONSTITUENT SHARED IN AUGUST
ELEVEN THREE TWENTY TWO LETTER
FROM RICH CEO OF BP, A SMALL
PROPERTY GROUP LETTER ADDRESSED
TO THE MAYOR CITY COUNCIL
MEMBERS OF BANK COMMISSIONERS
AS YOU MAY KNOW MORE AS THEY
ARE WILLING TO GO TO ANOTHER
HUNDRED SHOPPING CENTERS TO
STAFF DISTRIBUTE THIS LETTER TO
COUNCIL MEMBERS AND IF SO WHEN
NO PLANNING STAFF DISTRIBUTED
THIS TO THE PLANNING COMMISSION
IT WAS INCLUDED IN THE PUBLICLY
AVAILABLE AUGUST 16TH
COMMISSION PACKET ON THE
WEBSITE WE SENT THE LETTER TO
COUNCIL MEMBERS LAST FRIDAY,
SEPTEMBER 30TH.
PLEASE PROVIDE A SUMMARY OF ANY
COMMUNICATIONS INCLUDING PHONE
CALLS OF THE CITY STAFF HAD
WITH SIX MORE STAFF TO ADDRESS
THE ISSUES FACING THE LETTER
STAFF HAS HAD MULTIPLE EMAILS
AND ONE VIDEO CALL WITH
REPRESENTATIVE FOR WITH SIX
MORE BETWEEN MARCH 22ND AND
AUGUST 22ND.
I WOULD DESCRIBE THE SUMMARY
OF THIS AS CLARIFYING EDUCATION
ON THE IMPACT THAT RESULT THAT
ULTIMATELY RESULTED IN MORE
SHARING THAT THEY WERE NOT
SUPPORTIVE OF THE PROPOSED
ZONING FOR PROPERTY.
CITY STAFF ENCOURAGE THEM THEN
TO ADDRESS THAT AT THE PLANNING
COMMISSION PUBLIC HEARING AND
TO SHARE THEIR CONCERNS WRITING
FOR THE AFFECTED PLANNING STAFF
RAISED IN THEIR TWENTY JUNE
28TH COMMUNICATION TO THE
ORDINANCE REVISIONS COMMITTEE
COULD STAFF EXPLAIN HOW THOSE
ISSUES SPECIFICALLY
BRAINSTORMING SESSIONS
PROGRESSED?
ALL THE OPTIONS WERE PRESENTED
TO THE ORDINANCE REVISIONS
COMMITTEE AND AFTER THAT
DISCUSSION WE AS PLANNING STAFF
ELECTED TO PROCEED WITH THE
PROPOSED REZONING INTO ALITY.
I&apos;M PART OF SOME OF THOSE AREAS
CONSIDERING DIFFERENT AREAS,
DIFFERENT ZONING, OTHER RIBIS
DISTRICT BUT AFTER THAT
ESPECIALLY THE STAFF ELECTED TO
PROCEED WITH SO MANY ASPECTS
OF THE PLAN, THE ORDINANCE
PROVISIONS COMMITTEE HAD PLAYED
A SIGNIFICANT ROLE IN THE TCE
AND ORDINANCE REVISION THIS
EVENING WITH STAFF.
PLEASE EXPLAIN WHY WE DID NOT
HAVE THE MINUTES THE BOARD
MEETING ARE VIDEOS OF THE GROUP
MEETING TO BUILD REGISTER THE
ORGANIZATIONS COMMITTEE IS NOT
AUTHORIZED WERE UNABLE TO MAKE
ANY DECISION THUS NO MINUTES OR
RECORDINGS OF THE MEETINGS ARE
THE STAFF AWARE OF ANY
COMMUNICATION IMPLYING
LITIGATION IF DOCUMENTED ISSUES
CANNOT BE RESOLVED?
&gt;&gt; NO WE ARE NOT STAFF AT LEAST
ONE COMMISSIONER QUESTIONED THE
LIMITED SETBACKS AS A SAFETY
HAZARD HAZARD PUT
TRANSPORTATION ENGINEER
EXPLAINED WHY ARE WE ARE NOT
COMPLYING WITH THE GENERALLY
ACCEPTED ENGINEERING STANDARDS
TRIANGLE BASED ON THE EXISTING
TRAFFIC SPEED?
GIVEN OUR PEOPLE THIS
ASSUMPTION IS NOT ACCURATE.
THE CITY REVIEWS ALL PLANS TO
ENSURE THAT THEY MEET ACCEPTED
ENGINEERING STANDARDS FOR SITE
THE TRIANGLES REGARDLESS
OF SETBACKS.
&gt;&gt; COULD STAFF IDENTIFY THE
MAXIMUM NUMBER OF HOUSING UNITS
POSSIBLE UNDER CHIESI ONE IN
THE STADIUM AREA AND WHAT IS
OUR TARGET NUMBER OF UNITS TO
SUPPORT OPTIMAL TRANSIT?
NO, THIS WOULD REQUIRE A
DEVELOPMENT SCENARIO PLANNING
EACH PARCEL.
PUBLIC TRANSIT IN THE CITY IS
RESPONSIVE TO LAND USE AS
DENSITY IN THE CORRESPONDING
TRIP GENERATION INCREASE A HAS
THE ABILITY TO RESPOND IN
SERVICE SUCH AS INCREASED
FREQUENCY AND TIME SPAN OR IN
THE CASE OF THEIR RECENTLY
ADOPTED LONG RANGE PLAN
TRANSIT
HUBS THAT THE CITY IS
CONSIDERING.
&gt;&gt; THAT&apos;S LESS THE QUESTION.
&gt;&gt; THANK YOU ALL.
THANK YOU FOR THOSE ANSWERS.
FIRST I&apos;D LIKE TO REQUEST THAT
THE CITY ADMINISTRATOR ENSURE
THAT WHEN COMMUNICATIONS ARE
ADDRESSED TO THE MAYOR AND CITY
COUNCIL THEY ARE DELIVERED TO
THE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
EITHER ELECTRONICALLY OR BY
PUTTING THEM IN OUR BOXES.
I SEARCHED FOR THE BRICKS MORE
LETTER AND COULD NOT FIND IT ON
REGISTER OR OUTLOOK SCANNING
THE WORD BRICKS OR SO I AM A
LITTLE CONCERNED ABOUT THAT.
&gt;&gt; I WOULD TAKE EXCEPTION
REGARDING THE ORDINANCE
REVISION COMMITTEE IT SEEMS
LIKE MANY PUBLIC CONCERNS WENT
INTO THE ORDINANCE REVISIONS
COMMITTEE AND SOMEHOW DURING
THAT PROCESS AND MAYBE IT WAS
AFTER IT WENT BACK TO PLANNING
WE DECIDED NOT TO CONSIDER ANY
OF THE ISSUES THAT WERE RAISED
BY THE PUBLIC OR BY THE LARGEST
LANDOWNER.
&gt;&gt; SO WE HAVE TO ACCEPT ANY
UNDERBODY.
&gt;&gt; WE HAVE A VERY, VERY
POWERFUL HIDDEN POLITICAL
MACHINE AND IF YOU GET IN THEIR
WAY YOU&apos;RE ROADKILL AND I AM
VERY, VERY UPSET THAT SOMEHOW
ALL OF THE PUBLIC&apos;S CONCERNS
WERE SIMPLY PAVED OVER.
&gt;&gt; NOW ALSO THE ORDINANCE
REVISION COMMITTEE DOES PLAY A
SIGNIFICANT ROLE AND I BELIEVE
MINUTES ARE REQUIRED PER THE
COUNCIL RULES.
&gt;&gt; LASTLY, PASSING ZONING THAT
IS ACTUALLY CONTRIBUTING TO
PEDESTRIAN AND CYCLING CRASHES
NOT TO MENTION VEHICLE CRASHES
SEEMS TO BE EXTREMELY
IRRESPONSIBLE TO ME.
WHY NOT PUT IT IN THE ZONING?
I TALKED TO ONE DEVELOPER AND
HE SAID HE ACTUALLY HAD TO ASK
FOR AN EXCEPTION IN ORDER TO
HAVE WHAT HE CONSIDERED A SAFE
SITE DISTANCE TRIANGLE ON THE
CORNER OF HIS BUILDING.
&gt;&gt; SO I DON&apos;T MEAN TO BE
NEGATIVE TOWARD STAFF.
&gt;&gt; THIS IS NOT THESE DECISIONS
ARE NOT MADE BY STAFF.
THEY ARE MADE BY A BIGGER POWER
IN THE CITY OF ANN ARBOR.
&gt;&gt; BUT WE HAVE GOT TO RECOGNIZE
THAT AND TAKE CORRECTIVE
ACTION.
&gt;&gt; THANK YOU, COUNCILWOMAN.
THANK YOU.
THIS IS A FIRST READING BUT I&apos;M
INCREDIBLY EXCITED TO BE
SUPPORTING THIS TONIGHT.
&gt;&gt; I WAS EXCITED TO SEE IT
HAPPEN AT STAYTON EISENHOWER
THIS HAS LONG BEEN COUNCIL
POLICY.
&gt;&gt; IT&apos;S BEST PRACTICE A LOT
OF EXPERTS SEE THE TRANSIT
ZONING IS AS FAIRLY LOW HANGING
FRUIT IN ACHIEVING OUR GOALS
AND ONE WE WELL IT DOESN&apos;T
HAPPEN AUTOMATICALLY AS WE CAN
SEE IN STATE AND EISENHOWER I
DON&apos;T THINK THAT THERE&apos;S BEEN
THIS MASS EXODUS OF LOCAL
BUSINESSES LEAVING SINCE THAT
AREA HAS BEEN REZONED.
SO I I ALSO JUST AFTER HAVING
DONE THIS JOB FOR FOR SOME TIME
,THERE IS A SIGNIFICANT
DIFFERENCE BETWEEN LISTENING
AND AGREEING AND JUST BECAUSE
ONE DISAGREES DOESN&apos;T MEAN THAT
THEY WEREN&apos;T LISTENING OR
TAKING INTO ACCOUNT CONCERNS.
IT JUST MEANS THAT YOU HEAR
THEM AND BASED ON YOUR VALUES,
BEST PRACTICES, INPUT FROM
EXPERTS, YOU MAY THEN DISAGREE.
IT DOESN&apos;T MEAN THAT THERE&apos;S A
CONSPIRACY.
IT DOESN&apos;T MEAN THAT THEY&apos;RE
DARK POWERS THAT ARE SOMEHOW
INFLUENCING ONE&apos;S BRAIN IF THEY
CHOOSE TO DISAGREE, THEY JUST
SOME OF US, YOU KNOW, DISAGREE
ON POLICY ISSUES AND THAT&apos;S OK
ESPECIALLY IF YOU&apos;RE
TRANSPARENT ABOUT WHAT THOSE
VALUES ARE.
COUNCIL MEMBER BRIGS
.
&gt;&gt; THANKS.
I&apos;M EXCITED TO SEE THIS ON THE
AGENDA TONIGHT AND MOVING
FORWARD WITH THE REZONING
OF STADIUM AND MAPLE TO TAKE
ONE.
THIS IS IN THE FIFTH WARD AND I
CAN SAY THAT WHEN I KNOCK DOORS
IN TWENTY TWENTY I HEARD PRETTY
CLEARLY THAT THERE WAS STRONG
SUPPORT ACROSS THE FIFTH WARD
FOR INCREASED DENSITY ALONG
TRANSIT CORRIDORS THAT&apos;S
REFLECTED IN OUR COMMUNITY
PLANS AND I&apos;VE CHECKED IN WITH
THE WARD INCOMING 5TH WARD
COUNCIL PERSON JAN CORNELL AND
SHE HEARD THE SAME SENTIMENTS
THE DOOR THIS DURING THIS
ELECTION CYCLE SO YOU KNOW
CERTAINLY THERE ARE A LOT
OF QUESTIONS THAT COME UP
DURING THIS PROCESS AND IT&apos;S
IMPORTANT THAT WE MAKE SURE
THAT THEY GET ADDRESSED AND
PEOPLE&apos;S CONFUSION ABOUT WHAT
THIS IS AND WHAT THIS ISN&apos;T GET
ADDRESSED.
I WOULD LIKE TO ASK ONE
QUESTION.
A FEW THINGS CAME UP DURING
PUBLIC COMMENT THAT I&apos;D LIKE TO
ADDRESS ONE STATEMENT WAS THAT
CITY STAFF RECOMMENDED AGAINST
THIS REZONING.
I WAS WONDERING IF MR. LEONARD
COULD ADDRESS THAT QUESTION
THAT COMMENT.
&gt;&gt; SO DURING THAT CONSIDERATION
OF THIS PROPOSED REZONING WE
HAD TWO PUBLIC MEETINGS.
ONE OF THOSE PUBLIC MEETINGS
WAS ACTUALLY HELD IN PLACE
OF US REGULARLY SCHEDULED
PLANNING COMMISSION.
SO PLANNING COMMISSIONERS
DEFINITELY HAD THE OPPORTUNITY
TO HEAR FROM THE PUBLIC WE
PRESENTED TO AND DISCUSS WITH
THE ORDINANCE VIGILANCE
COMMITTEE AS DISCUSSED SOME
POTENTIAL RESPONSES TO SOME
OF THOSE CONCERNS WE LOST MUCH
OF THAT WAS BASED ON THE FACT
THAT THE SIZE OF MANY PARCELS
IN THE STADIUM ARE QUITE SMALL
AND SMALLER PARCELS MAY BE MORE
CHALLENGING TO MEET SOME OF THE
DESIGN ELEMENTS OF THE DC ONE.
&gt;&gt; SO BUT AT THE END OF THAT
DISCUSSION, AS I INDICATED
PREVIOUSLY WE PRESENTED TO THE
FULL PLANNING COMMISSION WIDEST
ZONING MAP POTENTIAL THAT HAD
BEEN CONTEMPLATED TO DATE ALL
THROUGHOUT TO GIVE THE PLANNING
COMMISSION THE OPPORTUNITY.
WE BELIEVE THAT THE TCE WANTING
ZONING IS AN IMPROVED BENEFIT
FOR THAT BOTH FOR CONSISTENCY
OF ZONING AND TO HELP ELIMINATE
SOME ADVERSARIAL ASPECTS OF THE
CURRENT DEVELOPMENT PATTERN
TOWARDS THE GOALS THAT ARE
ALREADY DISCUSSED TONIGHT.
SO YEAH, WE ARE SUPPORTIVE
OF THE THANK YOU SO MUCH FOR
THAT CLARIFICATION FURTHER YOU
KNOW WE&apos;VE HEARD IN PUBLIC
COMMENT THAT THIS IS AN ONGOING
AND THAT IS SIMPLY NOT TRUE.
THIS IS A NEW ZONING CATEGORY
AND IT&apos;S IMPORTANT TO RECOGNIZE
THAT SOME OF I THINK THERE ARE
FIFTY FOUR PARCELS THAT ARE
CURRENTLY OWNED THAT HAVE NO
HEIGHT LIMITS ALONG STADIUM AND
MAPLE AREA AND ACTUALLY TAKE
ONE CAPS HEIGHT ON ALL OF THESE
PROPERTIES AND THERE ARE AS
COUNCIL MEMBER DISH MENTIONED
PREVIOUSLY, THERE ARE HEIGHT
JUST BASED ON PROXIMITY TO
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTIES.
SO I THINK THAT&apos;S AN IMPORTANT
CLARIFICATION THAT&apos;S BEEN A
MISCHARACTERIZATION AROUND THIS
THIS ZONING CATEGORY INWITH
REGARDS TO SAFETY WE HEARD VERY
CLEARLY BOTH NOW AND PLANNING
COMMISSION HEARD THAT THE
SETBACKS WILL PROVIDE BE
REVIEWED FOR SAFETY RISKS AND
ADJUSTMENTS WILL BE RECOMMENDED
BY STAFF IF NEED NEED BE TO
ADDRESS THE SAFETY ISSUES
COUNCIL ARE.
THANK YOU.
I&apos;M DELIGHTED TO SEE THIS
BEFORE US TONIGHT LIKE COUNCIL
MEMBER DESH WHEN I RAN IN
TWENTY TWENTY TRANSPORTATION OR
TRANSIT CORRIDOR ZONING
INCREASING DENSITY ALONG OUR
TRANSIT CORRIDORS WAS SOMETHING
THAT I HEARD WIDE AGREEMENT
FROM CONSTITUENTS RESIDENTS
THROUGHOUT THE FOURTH WARD
WHICH ABUTS THIS AREA AND
INDEED THIS IS ONE THE AREAS
THAT I THAT I MENTIONED TO
THOSE RESIDENTS WHEN I SPOKE
WITH THEM.
SO I DO BELIEVE THAT IN
SUPPORTING US I&apos;M DOING EXACTLY
WHAT THE MAJORITY OF RESIDENTS
WANT AND EXPRESS THAT DESIRE
FOR WHEN THEY VOTED FOR ME TO
SOME OF THE QUESTIONS THAT HAVE
BEEN RAISED, I REALLY
APPRECIATE COUNCIL MEMBER DESH
SHEDDING LIGHT ON A COUPLE
OF THE LARGEST CONCERNS THAT
HAVE BEEN RAISED ONE THAT THIS
IS SOMEHOW OUTSIDE OF PROCESS.
IT IS NOT IT IS VERY MUCH
WITHIN THE PROCESS AND AS SHE
NOTED, WE ARE BEHIND NOT AHEAD
THIS TYPE OF DENSITY ALONG OUR
TRANSIT CORRIDORS AS MENTIONED
IN SEVEN AS SHE SAID, DIFFERENT
ASPECTS OF OUR CURRENT
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
AND SO THIS IS RIGHT IN LINE
WITH OUR CURRENT PROCESS FOR
DOING SUCH A REZONING.
AND FINALLY THE CONCERNS THAT I
HAVE HEARD MOST FROM RESIDENTS
HAVE HAVE BEEN ABOUT THE
BUSINESS POTENTIAL LOSS
OF BUSINESS AND I THINK COUNCIL
MEMBER DISH AGAIN I JUST WANT
TO UNDERSCORE WHAT SHE SAID
BECAUSE I THINK IT&apos;S SO
IMPORTANT THAT CURRENTLY
LANDOWNERS ARE ONLY USING
TWENTY FIVE PERCENT OF THE
POSSIBLE DENSITY UNDER CURRENT
ZONING.
SO IF WE&apos;RE NOT SEEING
BUSINESSES BEING BOUGHT OUT AND
RAISED FOR REDEVELOPMENT NOW
YOU KNOW, IT SEEMS VERY
UNLIKELY THAT IT WOULD HAPPEN
WITH THIS REZONING AND FINALLY
AT THE AT THE WESTGATE LIBRARY
MEETING THIS WEEK OR LAST WEEK
RATHER THE ONE AND ONLY
BUSINESS OWNER WHO DID SHOW
MOLLY GAING WHO OWNS A LITTLE
SEEDLING CHILDREN&apos;S STORE WAS
INCREDIBLY SUPPORTIVE OF IT.
AND AS SHE NOTED AS A BUSINESS
OWNER WHO DOESN&apos;T OWN HER
SPACE, THERE&apos;S ALWAYS THE
THREAT OF BEING KICKED OUT FOR
ONE REASON OR ANOTHER AND
THAT&apos;S JUST SOMETHING
THAT THEY
LIVE WITH.
BUT SHE EXPRESSED EXCITEMENT
FOR THE IDEA OF OF HAVING NEW
RESIDENTS IN THE AREA WALKABLE
TO SUPPORT HER BUSINESS.
SO I APPRECIATED HER SHARING
THAT PERSPECTIVE.
&gt;&gt; COUNCILOR HINER, THANKS
QUESTION FOR OUR CITY ATTORNEY.
DID OUR JUST RECENTLY PASSED
RIGHT TO RENEW ORDINANCE
COVER OF COMMERCIAL LEASES AS
WELL?
I&apos;M ACTUALLY NOT SURE COUNCIL
MEMBER I BELIEVE IT WAS
DIRECTED TO RESIDENCES.
I&apos;M ABOUT 90 PERCENT SURE ON
THAT, RIGHT?
&gt;&gt; YEAH, THAT&apos;S WHAT I THOUGHT.
SO YOU KNOW THE NOTION THAT
WE&apos;VE PROVIDED ANY COVER FOR
THESE SMALL BUSINESSES IS IS
NOT REALLY ACCURATE.
&gt;&gt; THIS IS A THIS IS A CITY
INITIATED REZONING.
&gt;&gt; WHAT THAT MEANS IS THAT
WE&apos;VE TAKEN IT UPON OURSELVES
TO CHANGE SOMETHING THAT EXISTS
A VARIETY OF THINGS THAT EXIST
TO ONE THING AND THAT ONE THAT
CHANGES BASED ON THE ASSUMPTION
THAT THE HIGHEST AND BEST USE
FOR PROPERTY IN OUR CITY IS
DENSE RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT
IN SOME PROXIMITY TO TRANSIT
AND PERHAPS WALKABLE AREAS.
NOW WE ALL KNOW AND OF COURSE
WE ALL KNOW ESPECIALLY IN WARD
ONE THAT THE COMPREHENSIVE LAND
USE PLAN CALLED FOR LOWERTOWN
TO BE A MIXED USE URBAN
VILLAGE.
WE ALSO KNOW THAT ON PACARD
THAT GEORGE HAS THROWN IN THE
TOWEL ON ANY KIND OF MIXED USE
AND PLANNING COMMISSION HAS
ALLOWED THEM TO CONVERT THEIR
BUILDING TO ALL RESIDENTIAL
THEREBY DOING AWAY WITH
WHATEVER WALKABILITY EXISTED IN
THEIR NEIGHBORHOOD PRIOR TO THE
BUILDING OF GEORGE.
&gt;&gt; SO WE HAVE A COUPLE EXAMPLES
OF HOW ONE THIS BODY HAS FAILED
TO IMPLEMENT ITS OWN POLICIES
REPEATEDLY AND ALSO HOW AN
EXAMPLE OF AN EFFORT TO DO A
WALKABLE NEIGHBORHOOD FAILED IN
THE MARKETPLACE MUST SET THAT
ASIDE.
&gt;&gt; WE HAVE A TWO D TWO PLAN
WHICH FOCUSES ON THE DOWNTOWN
CORE RESIDENTIAL DENSITY IN THE
DOWNTOWN CORE.
WHEN WE TALK ABOUT SEVENTY FIVE
PERCENT OR ONE HUNDRED AND
SEVENTY FIVE PERCENT INCREASE
IN THE LAND USE HERE IN THESE
ONE CORRIDORS POTENTIALLY
OBVIOUSLY BUSINESSES ARE GOING
TO GET WIPED AWAY IF THIS IS
SET ON TOP OF ALL THESE
DIFFERENT PROPERTIES WITH ALL
THEIR VARIOUS ZONINGS ANY
CHANGE THEY WANT TO MAKE SURE
PROPERTIES HAS TO FALL INTO
THIS ONE THIS CITY INITIATORY
REZONING.
SO WHY IN HEAVEN&apos;S NAME HAVE WE
NOT CREATED A TYPE OF ZONING
THAT REQUIRES ALL THE GOALS
THAT WE SEVEN OR EIGHT TO ZERO
PLAN THAT IS COMING UP ON THE
BALLOT THAT WE HAVE ALL OUR
OTHER PLANS?
WHY ARE WE SAYING THE HIGHEST
AND BEST USE OF THIS IS
STANDARD?
GO AHEAD AND BUILD WHATEVER YOU
WANT AS LONG AS THE VOLUMES
MEET THIS DESCRIPTION IT
DOESN&apos;T MAKE ANY SENSE TO ME.
CITY INITIATED REZONING SHOULD
BE HELD FOR IMPROVEMENTS IN
WHAT IS GOING TO BE CONSTRUCTED
THERE AND STILL BE STANDING IN
TWENTY THIRTY JUST MORE OF THE
SAME MAYBE WE HAVE A DOWNTOWN
CORE.
THE WAY WE&apos;RE TREATING OUR
ZONING RIGHT NOW IS THAT WE&apos;RE
TREATING A FREEWAY RING LIKE
IT&apos;S THE EDGE OF DOWNTOWN AND
WE&apos;RE TREATING THE TOWNSHIPS
LIKE THEY&apos;RE THE NEIGHBORHOODS
AND OUR GREENBELT IS LIKE
PORTLAND&apos;S FAILED GROWTH
BOUNDARY.
I&apos;M NOT UP FOR IT.
&gt;&gt; I&apos;M NOT GOING TO SUPPORT
THIS FOR THE DISCUSSION COUNCIL
OF MIND.
&gt;&gt; THANK YOU.
IT&apos;S THE OTHER BOARD
REPRESENTATIVE.
I&apos;LL BE SPEAKING TO THIS ALSO
AT THIRTY OR THIRTY.
YOU&apos;RE A SMALL BUSINESS OWNER
AS WELL AS A TWENTY YEAR
RESIDENT OF THE OLD WESTSIDE.
I THINK I HAVE EXTENSIVE
KNOWLEDGE AND HISTORY OF WHAT&apos;S
HAPPENED IN OUR COMMUNITY,
WHAT&apos;S HAPPENED TO SMALL
BUSINESSES IN THE DISAPPEARANCE
OF SMALL BUSINESSES, ESPECIALLY
IN THE DOWNTOWN AFTER DO YOU
WANT TO EXPAND FIFTEEN, TWENTY
YEARS AGO TO THE RAPID
ACCELERATION IN RENTS BECAUSE
OF THE VALUE OF THE AIR SPACE
GAVE TO THAT GROUND FLOOR LEVEL
?
&gt;&gt; YOU KNOW, IN THEY&apos;RE NOT
ACTUALLY WITH THE COUNCIL
MEMBER HAYNER THIS BODY DOESN&apos;T
FAIL TO ENACT THE POLICIES.
IT FAILS TO REACH ITS GOALS.
THIS IS A LOUSY FAIR APPROACH
TO AFFORDABILITY AND
SUSTAINABILITY WILL NOT WORK.
YOU WILL NOT GET THE
SUSTAINABILITY GOALS THAT YOU
WANT.
YOU WILL NOT GET THE AFFORDABLE
HOUSING YOU ARE CALLING FOR.
&gt;&gt; THAT&apos;S WHAT I THE DOORS I
HEARD ABOUT SUSTAINABILITY,
AFFORDABILITY.
NOT VERY MANY PEOPLE TALKED
ABOUT YOU ON ONE CALL.
THIS HAS LOTS OF NEGATIVE
CONSEQUENCE TO IT.
YEAH WE WANT TO IGNORE THIS IS
A HODGEPODGE WAY TO REDEVELOP
THAT AREA IN THIS AREA IS NOT
LIKE STATE STREET AND
EISENHAUER.
IT&apos;S APPLES TO ORANGES NAMELY
FIVE SMALL LOCAL BUSINESSES
OVER THERE ON STATE STREET AND
EISENHAUER AS A RESIDENT OF THE
ASIDE, IT&apos;S NICE TO BE ABLE TO
GO TO THAT CORRIDOR RIGHT NOW
AND DO MY SHOPPING ON A DAILY
BASIS.
IT&apos;S CONVENIENT.
IT HAS A LOT OF THINGS, A LOT
OF SMALL BUSINESSES AND IT&apos;S
GOING TO BE WIPED AWAY.
IT&apos;S GOING TO COME INTO ANOTHER
FRANCHISE EARLY TO LIKE WE HAVE
IN DOWNTOWN WHO COMES INTO
DOWNTOWN NOW AS A SMALL MOM AND
POP SHOPS.
HOW LONG DO THEY LAST?
WILL YOU GET TO THE END OF THE
FIRST YEAR, THE FIRST TERM
OF THE LEASE AND MAKE IT FIVE
YEARS THIS FAILS TO GET ANY
ASSURANCES ZERO FROM ZERO
THAT&apos;S WHAT YOU GET ZERO.
COUNCILMAN GRISWOLD?
YEAH, I THINK WE ALL AGREE ON
THE GOALS OF SUSTAINABILITY,
AFFORDABILITY AND IN SOME
RESPECTS DENSITY.
BUT THERE ARE OVER HERE AND TCN
ONE IS A GIANT LEAP OF FAITH
OVER HERE AND THERE ARE
UNINTENDED CONSEQUENCES THAT
WERE JUST TOTALLY IGNORING AT
THIS POINT.
AND ONE OF THOSE UNINTENDED
CONSEQUENCES IS THE
DISCRIMINATORY AND RACIST
RESULT OF TRAPPING PEOPLE INTO
APARTMENTS.
AND I&apos;VE HEARD NOTHING ABOUT
CONDOS OR ANY TYPE OF HOUSING
AND WE&apos;RE NOT LOOKING AT THAT.
&gt;&gt; I ALSO WANT THE RECORD TO
SHOW THAT I SPECIFIC ASKED TO
HEAR FROM A TRANSPORTATION
ENGINEER THAT&apos;S SOMEONE WHOSE
LICENSE IN THE STATE
OF MICHIGAN AND I HAVE BEEN
BANNED, DENIED THAT RIGHT TO
HEAR AND INSTEAD IT&apos;S JUST OH
DON&apos;T WORRY ABOUT IT, CATHY.
IT&apos;LL ALL WORK OUT.
WE&apos;LL TAKE CARE OF IT LATER.
&gt;&gt; THAT&apos;S NOT HOW YOU DO
TRANSPORTATION ENGINEERING.
THAT&apos;S LIKE BUILDING A BRIDGE
FROM BOTH ENDS AND HOPING IT
MEETS IN THE MIDDLE.
NOW IT&apos;S WHEN WE SHOULD BE
LOOKING AT SETBACKS AND WE&apos;RE
NOT DOING THAT.
&gt;&gt; LASTLY, I&apos;D LIKE TO OFFER AN
AMENDMENT THAT WE REMOVE TWENTY
SIX ACRES OWNED BY BRICK
SOMMORE FROM THE TI SEE ONE
ZONING MAP IS THERE A SECOND
SECOND SECOND IT SO WE CAN VOTE
ON SECOND BY BRITISH COUNCIL
MEMBER GRISWOLD?
&gt;&gt; I HAVE NOTHING ELSE TO SAY.
MAYOR TAYLOR, ANY DISCUSSION ON
THE AMENDMENT?
I FIND THAT I WOULD BE
PROBLEMATIC LEGALLY AND I THINK
MAYBE THAT&apos;S WHAT CITY
ATTORNEYS MEAN.
&gt;&gt; YOU&apos;RE GOING TO HELP US.
YEAH, MAYOR TAYLOR, WE MIGHT
HAVE TO LOOK I MEAN YOU CAN
MOVE ON THE AMENDMENT BUT WE&apos;D
HAVE TO CHECK WHETHER WE&apos;RE
ALLOWED TO DO THAT CARVEOUT.
&gt;&gt; WOULD YOU REPEAT THAT
PLEASE?
YOU CAN MOVE ON THE AMENDMENT
BUT I&apos;D HAVE TO CHECK ON
WHETHER WE CAN ACTUALLY DO THAT
CARVEOUT OK, IS THERE ANY
DISCUSSION THE AMENDMENT
ROLL-CALL VOTE COUNCILOR HERE I
HAVE A QUESTION PERHAPS ALSO
FOR THE ATTORNEY IN THAT VEIN
SO WE SAW IN THE REPORT THAT
THERE WERE SEVERAL PROPERTIES
WHO CAME TO THE CITY AND
REQUESTED EITHER IN WRITING OR
IN PERSON THAT THEY BE EXEMPTED
FROM THIS APPLICATION.
&gt;&gt; AND I WAS THAT WERE THOSE
EXEMPTIONS ALLOWED PRIOR TO
THIS APPLICATION FOR THE
HUNDRED NINETY PARCELS COMING
FORWARD LIKE WE&apos;RE ORIGINALLY
THEY WERE TWO HUNDRED OR
WHATEVER WERE THOSE HANDFUL
OF PEOPLE WHO DIDN&apos;T WANT TO BE
PART THIS ALLOWED TO OPT OUT
PRIOR TO IT REACHING MY DESK
HERE?
&gt;&gt; MAYBE MAYBE IT&apos;S THE LETTER
KNOWS YEAH WE PRESENTED THOSE
REQUESTS TO THE PLANNING
COMMISSION.
THEY DID NOT MODIFY THE MAP
PART THAT WAS PART OF THE
ORIGINAL INTENTION OF FOCUSING
ON CURRENTLY ZONED COMMERCIAL
PROPERTIES VERSUS RESIDENTIAL
PROPERTIES AND INCLUDING THE
CORRESPONDENCE.
BUT IN SHORT THOSE REQUESTS
CAME IN.
THEY REPRESENTED THE PLANNING
COMMISSION, THE PLANNING
COMMISSION ELECTED TO MAINTAIN
THOSE PARCELS AND THE REASON
THANK YOU FOR THE DISCUSSION
OF THE COUNCIL FROM EARLY ON
THE AMENDMENT RIGHT BECAUSE
REMEMBER BRIGGS HAD HER HAND UP
FIRST.
I&apos;M SORRY
BACK IT&apos;S HARD.
&gt;&gt; WOW.
MY APOLOGIES.
THANKS COUNCIL MEMBER.
I&apos;M LIKE YEAH, I&apos;M NOT I&apos;M NOT
SUPPORTIVE OF THIS.
I DO THINK THAT THIS REZONING
IS INTENDED TO ADDRESS IN
REDEVELOPMENT EXACTLY.
SITUATIONS LIKE THAT THAT
BRINGS MORE PROPERTY THAT IS A
SUBURBAN DEVELOPMENT THAT HAS A
BIG PARKING LOT OUT FRONT AND
IT&apos;S NOT CONDUCIVE TO WHAT
WE&apos;RE LOOKING FOR FOR THE
FUTURE OF OUR COMMUNITY DOWN
THE LINE SO EXPLICITLY THIS
THIS REZONING TRIES TO ADDRESS
THAT STRIP MALL CONTEXT MOVING
FORWARD.
ALSO I WOULD LIKE TO NOTE THE
IRONY THAT WE HAVE BEEN ACCUSED
OF MANY OF US OF BEING A
POLITICAL MACHINE AND BEING
BOUGHT OUT BY DEVELOPERS AND
YET THERE&apos;S ONLY ONE PERSON AT
THIS TABLE RESPONDING TO
DEVELOPMENT AT THIS MOMENT.
FURTHER DISCUSSION ON THE
AMENDMENT.
COUNCILOR HAYNER, I&apos;M SURE WITH
THAT LAST REMARK MEANT BUT I
WOULD JUST POINT OUT THAT WHEN
WE APPLIED ONE TO THE STATE
STREET CORRIDOR WE THE UBER
SUBURBAN DEVELOPMENT
OF BRIARWOOD MALL WAS
SPECIFICALLY EXCLUDE FROM THAT
.
&gt;&gt; WHY IS THAT?
DOESN&apos;T IT HAVE THE SAME FAULTS
AND INCOMPATIBILITY WITH OUR
OUR GOALS THAT SAY THE BRICKS
MORE PERSONAL DOES IS IN IT A
LOT OF COMING AND GOING
OF RETAIL AND COMMERCIAL USES
SURROUNDED BY PARKING SO
ANOTHER EXAMPLE OF THE
INCONSISTENT APPLICATION
OF POLICIES AND ESPECIALLY
AROUND ZONING AND LAND USE BY
THIS BODY I I JUST FIND THAT I
FOUND THAT WHOLE THING CURIOUS
AT THE TIME AND EVEN MORE SO
NOW THAT THERE IS A A PUSH BACK
ON PERHAPS REMOVING ONE
OF THESE PARCELS.
I WON&apos;T SUPPORT REMOVING THIS
PARCEL BECAUSE I DON&apos;T SUPPORT
THE THING AT AND I MEAN YOU&apos;RE
ALL IN OR NOT OBVIOUSLY
PLANNING COMMISSION FELT THAT
WAY.
WE HAD BUSINESS OWNERS, LONG
TIME BUSINESS OWNERS, SOME
OF THEM WHO SAID PLEASE DON&apos;T
DON&apos;T APPLY THIS TO ME BECAUSE
IT&apos;S THE LIMITING IN MANY WAYS
FOR ME AS A BUSINESS OWNER AND
THEY IGNORED THOSE ENTREATIES
TO BE LEFT OUT OF IT.
SO YOU KNOW, WHY WOULD WE WHY
WOULD WE ALLOW THIS ONE THAT
WOULD EVEN THAT WOULD DOUBLE
DOWN OR TRIPLE DOWN ON OUR
INCONSISTENCY?
SO I GUESS JUST THAT TO SAY I
DON&apos;T SUPPORT REMOVING BRICKS
MORE FROM THIS.
OBVIOUSLY THEY DON&apos;T WANT TO BE
IN IT.
I DON&apos;T THINK A LOT OF THESE
PEOPLE NECESSARILY WANT TO BE
IN IT.
ONE PERSON OUT OF ONE HUNDRED
NINETY PARCELS COMING TO A
MEETING DOESN&apos;T MAKE A INFORMED
SURVEY.
&gt;&gt; SOME OF THEM I THINK YOU
LIKE MY COLLEAGUE WHO WON&apos;T BE
SUPPORTING THIS EVEN AT FIRST
READING I WON&apos;T BE SUPPORTING
THIS AMENDMENT EITHER.
I THINK YOU KNOW, I&apos;M PICKING
FAVORITES AND PICKING WINNERS
AND LOSERS AS A GOVERNMENT.
I KNOW MOTHERS DON&apos;T HAVE SUCH
A SUCH AN ISSUE WITH IT AND I
THINK HERE IS A CASE WHERE, YOU
KNOW, WHICH WAS WAS BROUGHT UP.
GREAT POINT.
YOU KNOW, WE DIDN&apos;T TAKE INTO
ACCOUNT BRIARWOOD HERE.
YOU KNOW, WE HAVE THAT SAME
RELATIVELY THE SAME KIND
OF ISSUE BUT YET WE&apos;RE
INCLUDING IT.
BUT FAR I HAVEN&apos;T BEEN UP HERE
FOR FOUR YEARS.
YOU KNOW, I WOULD BE SURPRISED
BUT I&apos;M NOT I GUESS I HAVE A
QUESTION FOR THE CITY ATTORNEY
AND WHETHER BECAUSE THIS IS A
CITY INITIATED REZONING,
WHETHER WE&apos;D BE THEORETICALLY
CAPABLE OF TAKING A PROPERTY BY
CAUSING THE HARDSHIP THAT SOME
PROPERTY OWNERS AND BUSINESS
OWNERS MAY FACE WITH THE
TRIGGERS THAT THIS REZONING
DOES WHEN THEY GO TO MAKE
CHANGES TO THEIR BUILDING AND
THE ENORMOUS HARDSHIP THAT WILL
BE CAUSED, YOU KNOW, IN
BUSINESSES HAVE EXPANSION AND
I&apos;VE GONE THROUGH THAT AND I&apos;VE
EXPERIENCED A LOT OF THINGS AND
NEW BUSINESSES DO THAT WHEN
THEY COME INTO AN EXISTING
SPACE AND YOU COME INTO THE
EXISTING SPACE BUT NOT NOW
YOU&apos;VE GOT TO BE ADA COMPLIANT
.
WELL, THE OTHER TENANT WELL
WELL THAT WAS THE OTHER TENANT
OR THE NEW PERSON.
NOW YOU&apos;VE GOT TO COME IN AND
THESE KIND OF COSTS ARE NOT
CHEAP AND I EMBRACE ADA AND
THAT&apos;S ONE OF THE GREAT THINGS
ABOUT WHERE I&apos;M AT NOW.
I CAN HAVE PEOPLE COME IN WHO
COULD COME TO MY OLD LOCATION
BUT FORCING PEOPLE TO HAVE TO
COME INTO COMPLIANCE WITH THE
CITY INITIATED ZONING WITH
CONSTITUTE TAKING A PROPERTY
COUNCIL MEMBER.
IF YOU WOULD LIKE ADVICE ON
THAT WE&apos;LL BE HAPPY TO PROVIDE
IT IN WRITTEN FORM BUT WE
CERTAINLY WOULDN&apos;T PROVIDE IT
TO YOU WITHIN THIS FORUM TODAY
I WOULD ONLY ADD TO THE TAKINGS
LAW IS VERY SPECIFIC AND I
THINK IT IS IDEAL FOR A CITY TO
HAVE CONTINUOUS IMPROVEMENT IN
ENFORCEMENT OF LAWS.
AND WHILE I HAVE THE MIKE
COUNCIL MEMBER HAYNER, I
QUICKLY CHECKED ON YOUR
QUESTION AND THE RIGHT TO RENEW
APPLIES TO HOUSING
ACCOMMODATIONS ONLY.
&gt;&gt; WELL THANK YOU FOR THAT MUCH
APPRECIATED ON THE AMENDMENT.
&gt;&gt; AND CAN I ASK FOLKS TO STICK
WITH THE AMENDMENT EXCLUSIVELY
DISH DENHA NELSON GRANT OK, YOU
CAN JUDGE IF THIS IS ON THE
AMENDMENT BECAUSE IT MIGHT NOT
BE BUT IT HAS BEEN MENTIONED
THAT WE ARE INCONSISTENT IN NOT
IF WE WOULD VOTE NOT TO EXCLUDE
BRICKS MORE WHEN WE DID EXCLUDE
BRIARWOOD.
I GOT THAT OUT AND I WAS
WONDERING IF STAFF MR DELIO OR
MR LEINERT WOULD WANT TO
EXPLAIN THE RATIONALE AND THE
THE THE WHY BRIARWOOD WAS NOT
SEEMING TO BE APPROPRIATE FOR
TO SEE ONE ZONING I&apos;M HAPPY TO
TAKE A STAB AT THAT.
&gt;&gt; THE BRENTWOOD MALL IS NOT A
CORRIDOR.
IT&apos;S PART OF NODE AND IT NEEDS
A DIFFERENT TREATMENT THAN THE
TRANSIT CORRIDOR.
THE ONE DISTRICT WAS CRAFTED TO
BE PROPERLY APPLIED ACROSS
DIFFERENT AREAS OF THE CITY BUT
IT DOES HAVE A IT WAS CRAFTED
TO BE A CORRIDOR AND ON TRANSIT
CORRIDORS THE BRENTWOOD
FACILITY TO DOESN&apos;T IT AS A
CORRIDOR IT&apos;S THE END OF A LINE
AND THEY WOULD REALLY HAVE TO
REDO THEIR SERVICE WELL TO
ACCOMMODATE IT AND PLUS THE
AIRPORT IS SO LARGE IT&apos;S
REDEVELOPMENT IS GOING TO LOOK
A LOT DIFFERENT AND IT&apos;S NEXT
GENERATION IT&apos;S GOING TO LOOK A
LOT DIFFERENT FROM OUR OUR
COMMERCIAL CORRIDORS.
&gt;&gt; I THINK THAT WHEN WE WERE
LOOKING AT DAVID EISENHOWER NO
ONE DISAGREED THAT BRIARWOOD
NEEDS LOOKING AT AND MAYBE ITS
FUTURE IS PROBABLY NOT WHAT IT
IS TODAY BUT IT WAS UNIVERSALLY
AGREED THAT IT GETS A DIFFERENT
TOOL THAN T.S. ONE CAN&apos;T
REMEMBER DENHA THANK YOU.
I&apos;M GOING TO BE VERY BRIEF.
I&apos;M NOT GOING TO SUPPORT A
SPECIAL CARVE OUT FOR THIS
SINGLE PROPERTY OWNER.
I THINK IT ALSO SEEMS
RELATIVELY CLEAR THAT FOLKS
KNOW HOW THEY&apos;RE VOTING ON THIS
.
I THINK WE HAVE I HOPE THAT WE
CAN MOVE ALONG QUICKLY AND VOTE
ON THIS AMENDMENT SO THAT WE
CAN GET BACK TO HAVING THE
CONVERSATION THAT WE SEEM TO
KIND ALREADY BE HAVING DURING
THIS AMENDMENT PROCESS.
&gt;&gt; COUNCIL MEMBER NELSON I I
APPRECIATE THAT COUNCIL MEMBER
GRISWOLD IS TRYING TO ELEVATE
THE CONCERNS THAT WERE RAISED
BY BRIGGS MOORE AND I THINK
THAT IT WOULD BE VALUABLE FOR
OTHERS TO LOOK AT IT LIKE A LOT
OF RESIDENTS ON THIS CORRIDOR
AND LIKE A LIKE A FEW OF THE
PLANNING COMMISSIONERS AND SOME
SUGGESTIONS PROPOSED BY CITY
STAFF EVEN BRIGGS MOORE IS
SUGGESTING THAT THERE WAS A
DIFFERENT PATH TO DO THIS THAT
WOULD HAVE BEEN A GOOD BIT
SMARTER AND BETTER AND A LITTLE
BIT LESS DISRUPTIVE.
I&apos;M NOT GOING TO SUPPORT THIS
AMENDMENT.
I MEAN I FRANKLY LIKE IT&apos;S IT&apos;S
A PERSPECTIVE THAT IS
INFORMATIVE BUT THAT I OF ALL
OF THE PEOPLE TO BE TO ENJOY A
CARVE OUT AND MOORE IS PROBABLY
THE LAST ENTITY THAT I WOULD
OFFER IT TO ME JUST NO COUNCIL
MEMBER GRANT, THANK YOU.
&gt;&gt; I&apos;LL OBVIOUSLY BE NOT
SUPPORTING THIS.
&gt;&gt; IT&apos;S FAIRLY MIND BLOWING
ACTUALLY.
BUT I DO THINK IT&apos;S IMPORTANT
WHEN WE HEAR STATEMENTS THAT
ARE MADE AT THE TABLE THAT
TARGET GROUPS THAT DON&apos;T
NECESSARILY VOICE AT THE TABLE
THAT IT&apos;S IMPORTANT TO TO
ADDRESS COUNCIL MEMBERS WELL
TALKED ABOUT FORCING PEOPLE
INTO APARTMENTS BEING A RACIST
STRATEGY ONE I THINK THAT MAKES
A LOT OF ASSUMPTIONS ABOUT WHO
IS LIVING IN APARTMENTS THAT&apos;S
QUESTIONABLE TO I THINK IT AND
IT&apos;S NOT THE FIRST TIME THAT
WE&apos;VE HEARD NEGATIVE COMMENTS
ABOUT PEOPLE WHO LIVE IN
APARTMENTS
AND AND I THINK WE
HAVE TO REALLY UNDERSTAND THAT
IF WE WANT TO BE A WELCOMING
INCREASED COMMUNITY THAT MEANS
EMBRACING PEOPLE WHO LIVE IN
ALL TYPES OF HOUSING AS EQUAL
PARTICIPANT IN OUR COMMUNITY.
&gt;&gt; SO I I JUST THINK THAT WAS A
COMMENT THAT THAT REALLY
HURTFUL ACTUALLY TO A LOT
OF FOLKS AND JUST IMPORTANT TO
TO MAKE IT CLEAR TO THE PUBLIC
THAT NOT ALL OF US SHARE THOSE
VIEWS.
&gt;&gt; WELL, COUNCILMAN GRISWOLD TO
THE AMENDMENT MY MOTIVATION FOR
OFFERING IT WAS AFTER CAREFULLY
REVIEWING THE PROCESS US AND
ALL OF THE DOCUMENT MY INTENT
IS TO AVOID POSSIBLE
LITIGATION.
BRICK MOORE IS A LARGE
CORPORATION IN OUR EXPERIENCE
REGARDING GALMAN DEALING WITH A
LARGE CORPORATION IS THAT IT
HAS BEEN VERY, VERY EXPENSIVE
AND NOT SUCCESSFUL.
MY OTHER COMMENT ABOUT
APARTMENTS BEING DISCRIMINATORY
AND POSSIBLY RACIST IS THAT IF
WE DON&apos;T PROVIDE A DIVERSITY
OF LIVING ARRANGEMENT AND
PEOPLE MOVE INTO AN APARTMENT,
THE RENT KEEPS GOING UP AND
THEY GET TRAPPED.
WE NEED TO HAVE PATHWAYS.
WE NEED TO BE BUILDING CO-OPS.
WE NEED TO BE BUILDING CONDOS
IF WE&apos;RE NOT GOING TO BUILD
SINGLE FAMILY HOMES.
AND SO AGAIN, WE NEED A PATH
FOR PEOPLE TO MOVE INTO OTHER
TYPES OF HOUSING.
&gt;&gt; THANK YOU FOR THE DISCUSSION
OF THE MOVEMENT ROGOV UP WE
STARTED BRITISH
COSMETICIAN NO
MORE GRISMAN.
YES.
&gt;&gt; ELSMERE SONG NO
COUNTERPROGRAM NO CUSTOMER
DENHA NO MURTALA NO CUSTOMER
IHR NO CUSTOMER AND ALSO NO
CUSTOMER BRIGS NO CUSTOMER
ALLOWING NO CUSTOMER HAYNER NO
MOTION FAILS FOR THE
DISCUSSION.
&gt;&gt; THE MAIN MOTION COUNTS NO
HAYNER THANKS.
I&apos;M JUST GOING TO COMMENT
GENERALLY ON WHY I DON&apos;T
SUPPORT THIS AND I THINK THIS
IS THE OVERARCHING REASON THAT
THE NOTION OF TRANSIT ORIENTED
DEVELOPMENT WHICH IS HOW THIS
ALL STARTED NOT NECESSARILY
WITH OUR COMMUNITY ALTHOUGH
REIMAGINING WASHTENAW A WHILE
BACK WAS IN THAT RIGHT
DIRECTION THE NOTION
OF TRANSIT, ANY DEVELOPMENT
CENTERS ITSELF AROUND TRANSIT
CONNECTING VARIOUS PARTS OF THE
CITY AND IN A SORT OF A HUB
MODEL WHERE WE CREATE THESE
AREAS THAT ARE WALKABLE
NEIGHBORHOODS BUT PEOPLE ARE
ABLE TO TAKE ADVANTAGE OF THE
ENTIRETY OF THE TRANSIT NETWORK
TO GO FROM AREA TO AREA AND
WHAT IT CAME OUT AS WAS TRANSIT
TAXI ONE TRANSIT CORRIDOR TYPE
DISTRICTS NOT TRANSIT ORIENTED
DEVELOPMENT BUT TRANSIT
CORRIDOR DISTRICTS.
&gt;&gt; AND SO THE ESSENCE OF THAT
IS THAT ANY EVENTUALLY I
IMAGINE ANY PARCEL WITHIN A
CERTAIN DISTANCE FROM A BUS
STOP, NO MATTER HOW BUSY THE
CORRIDOR SAY PONTIAC RAIL FOR
EXAMPLE, WILL HAVE SOME TYPE
OF CORRIDOR OVERLAY PUT ON IT
WHICH ALLOWS THE CONSTRUCTION
OF THE SUBSTITUTION OF EXISTING
PROPERTIES WITH HIGH DENSITY
HOUSING AND POTENTIALLY MIXED
USE HOUSING.
ALTHOUGH THE REQUIREMENT IS
VERY MINIMAL IN THIS ONE.
AND AGAIN THERE&apos;S NO
REQUIREMENT FOR ANY KIND OF ,
YOU KNOW, SUSTAINABILITY OR
AFFORDABILITY OR ANYTHING THAT
IS IN KEEPING WITH OUR GOALS.
&gt;&gt; SO IT&apos;S JUST IT&apos;S NOT WORTH
IT FOR THE CITY TO INITIATE
THIS REZONING ON THE HOPE THAT
IT CHANGES SOMETHING FOR THE
BETTER BASED ON A FLAWED VISION
OF WHAT TRANSIT ORIENTED
DEVELOPMENT IS SUPPOSED TO BE.
&gt;&gt; IT&apos;S NOT READY FOR PRIME
TIME.
SORRY COUNCIL ISH.
&gt;&gt; OK, I&apos;M JUST VERY HAPPY TO
SAY THAT TO TRIPOLI TO SERVE
THE LENGTH OF THIS AREA AND
FIVE CROSSETT SO IT&apos;S IT&apos;S NOT
SIMPLY A QUESTION IT&apos;S
FREQUENCY AND COMPREHENSIVENESS
OF SERVICE.
I WANTED TO FOLLOW UP ON MR.
LEONARD THE DESCRIPTION OF THE
ROBUST DISCUSSION I&apos;M PLANNING
COMMISSION AND OVERSEE IT IS
TRUE THAT BOTH OF THESE PARTIES
RECOGNIZED THAT THE CITY
INFRASTRUCTURE ESPECIALLY WEST
STADIUM IS INHOSPITABLE TO MOST
PEDESTRIAN AND CYCLISTS ON WEST
STADIUM AND WE CONSIDERED
POSSIBLE TWEAKS TO THE FINER
DETAILS OF TAXI ONE AND WE DID
NOT REACH CONSENSUS ON WHICH
ONES MIGHT BE DESIRABLE OR EVEN
EFFECTIVE.
BUT THAT&apos;S NOT WHAT WE&apos;RE ASKED
TO DECIDE TONIGHT.
WHAT WE&apos;RE ASKED TO DECIDE
TONIGHT IS SOMETHING THAT
PLANNING COMMISSION MEMBERS ARE
UNANIMOUS ON AND THAT IS ON THE
BROAD QUESTION OF WHETHER THE
GOALS AND OBJECTIVES OF TAXI
ONE ARE APPROPRIATE AND
BENEFICIAL TO THE W8 IN MOBILE
AREA AND THEY ARE NOT ONLY
BECAUSE OF WHAT WE HOPE TAXI
ONE WILL ACHIEVE AND WE DO NOT
HAVE A CRYSTAL BALL WE DO NOT
KNOW BUT WE KNOW THAT IT WILL
PROHIBIT USES THAT DRAW
AUTOMOBILE TRAFFIC SUCH AS GAS
STATIONS, AUTO REPAIR CAR
WASHES.
IT ALSO PROHIBITS STORAGE
FACILITIES.
EXISTING USES OF THAT WILL
BECOME PROHIBITED CAN CONTINUE
OPERATING INDEFINITELY.
BUT LET ME TELL YOU THAT WE DID
ON PLANNING COMMISSION RECENTLY
CONSIDER A PROPOSAL FOR A
STORAGE FACILITY.
RESIDENTS WERE OPPOSED.
THE DEVELOPER BACKED DOWN.
THAT WAS GREAT.
BUT IF WE MAKE THIS REZONING WE
WILL NEVER HAVE TO HAVE THAT
DEBATE AGAIN.
AND I THINK THAT&apos;S REALLY
SIGNIFICANT AND IMPORTANT.
IT&apos;S A BENEFIT FURTHER
DISCUSSION COUNCIL MEMBER RAMLI
,THANK YOU.
IT&apos;S JUST DISAPPOINTING TO SAY
THE LEAST THAT THIS IS THE BEST
THIS BODY CAN DO
.
YOU KNOW WHEN WHEN I&apos;M OUT
THERE AND I WAS TALKING
CONSTITUENTS AND THEY ASK YOU
WHAT ARE YOU GOING TO DO FOR
ABOUT AFFORDABLE HOUSING AND
WHAT YOU CAN DO FOR CLIMATE
CHANGE, WHAT YOU CAN DO TO HELP
SMALL BUSINESSES AND PEOPLE YOU
KNOW AFFORD TO STAY AND LIVE
AND MOVE INTO ANN ARBOR AND YOU
KNOW, FOR A LOT OF IT WE REALLY
CAN&apos;T DO A WHOLE LOT.
&gt;&gt; WE REALLY CAN&apos;T MOVE THAT
NEEDLE VERY MUCH.
ST. PROHIBITS US FROM DOING
MUCH THE FEDERAL BANKING LAWS
ARE WHAT THEY ARE THE SYSTEMIC
RACISM AND DISCRIMINATION THAT
OCCURS IN OUR SOCIETY PERMEATES
ALL THE WAY THROUGH AND EVERY
FACET.
WE CAN&apos;T MAKE THOSE THOSE BIG
CHANGES HERE BUT WE CAN WE CAN
MAKE SOME CHANGES.
WE HAVE THAT CITY INITIATED
REZONING.
YOU CAN ACTUALLY DO SOMETHING
AND NOT JUST LEAVE IT TO THE
MARKETS THAT HAVE HELD US TO
THIS POINT.
BUT WHAT I&apos;M HEARING THE
COMMUNITY IS RECEIVING IS THAT
MAYOR THAT&apos;S THAT&apos;S IT&apos;S GOING
TO BE ALL RIGHT WITH THE MARKET
WILL PROVIDE WHAT IT HASN&apos;T
PROVIDED FOR THE LAST HUNDRED
OR FIFTY YEARS BECAUSE IT WILL
BE YOU KNOW, WE HAD A PLANNING
COMMISSIONER TALK ABOUT THE
FRUSTRATION THEY HAVE WITH
GETTING DEVELOPERS TO GO ALL
ELECTRIC RECENTLY AND IS QUOTED
AS SAYING IT&apos;S LIKE PULLING
TEETH.
IT&apos;S LIKE PULLING TEETH.
CANCER DEVELOPERS TO ADHERE TO
NEW BUILDING PRACTICES,
CROSSOVER BREAKS.
THANKS.
I THINK IT&apos;S I TALKED EARLIER
ABOUT WHY I WAS VERY SUPPORTIVE
OF THIS.
I WANTED TO SPEAK JUST BRIEFLY
ABOUT, YOU KNOW, SOME OF THE
THE CONCERNS THAT HAVE BEEN
RAISED HERE AT THE TABLE AND
ALSO WITHIN YOU KNOW, IN
COMMUNICATIONS, YOU KNOW, WE&apos;VE
HEARD ABOUT THIS IS NOT GOING
TO SOLVE AFFORDABILITY.
I THINK IT&apos;S DANGEROUS TO
SUGGEST THAT THERE IS ANY ONE
SILVER BULLET TO ADDRESSING OUR
AFFORDABILITY CRISIS IN ANN
ARBOR.
IT&apos;S GOING TO TAKE RIGHT
VARIETY OF POLICY SOLUTIONS TO
HELP US MOVE THE NEEDLE A
LITTLE BIT OVER 70 PERCENT
OF OUR LAND IS ZONED SINGLE
FAMILY ONLY AND PROVIDING MORE
HOUSING OPTIONS ALONG TRANSIT
CORRIDOR IS A STEP FORWARD IN
OUR COMMUNITY.
IT&apos;S NOT GOING TO SOLVE THE
PROBLEM BUT IT IS GOING TO
HELP.
IT IS GOING TO ADDRESS IT AND
HELP HELP US MOVE US FORWARD.
&gt;&gt; I DO THINK THAT YOU KNOW,
THIS IS A VERY STRONG LOCAL
RETAIL ENVIRONMENT THAT IS
SOMETHING MANY FOLKS IN THE
FIFTH WARD ARE CONCERNED ABOUT
IS MAINTAINING THAT IT&apos;S
SOMETHING THAT I MAINTAIN SOME
CONCERN AROUND AROUND WHAT WE
KNOW THAT WHEN REDEVELOPMENT
HAPPENS THAT THE INCOMING SPACE
IS MORE EXPENSIVE AND THAT&apos;S A
CHALLENGE AND WE NEED TO LOOK
AT WHAT POLICY SOLUTIONS THAT
WE MIGHT BE ABLE TO BRING TO
THE TABLE IN THE FUTURE THAT
MIGHT HELP SUPPORT AFFORDABLE
RETAIL SPACE.
THAT&apos;S A DIFFERENT POLICY
SOLUTION THAT I THINK WE CAN
CONSIDER IN THE FUTURE.
BUT AS WE SAW AT THE GEORGE
MANDATE IN RETAIL IS NOT ALWAYS
EFFECTIVE AND SO WE NEED TO
LEARN FROM OUR PAST LESSONS AS
WELL.
ONE ISSUE THAT HAS BEEN RAISED
OBVIOUSLY WHAT WE&apos;RE APPROVING
MOVING FORWARD AT FIRST READING
IS A MAP AMENDMENT WHETHER OR
NOT THIS IS APPROPRIATE FOR
REZONING TO TAKE ONE OR NOT.
I HAVE DEBATED MYSELF AND
TALKED TO OTHERS ABOUT WHETHER
OR NOT THERE IS A NEED FOR D.C.
WANT TO
SEE THROUGH?
YOU KNOW, AT THIS POINT I&apos;M NOT
SURE THAT WE NEED MULTIPLE
DESIGNATIONS.
THE ONLY SIGNIFICANT ISSUE THAT
I&apos;VE SEEN THAT IS STRUCTURALLY
DIFFERENT IS THE SET BACK ISSUE
IN TERMS OF OF WHICH I WILL
SPEAK TO AT SECOND READING
FURTHER DISCUSSION COUNCIL SONG
,I&apos;M REALLY GLAD THAT WE
TOUCHED ON OUR HOUSING
COMMITMENT TO BUILDING
AFFORDABLE HOUSING.
IF WE TAKE A LOOK AT THE
HOUSING AFFORDABILITY AND
ECONOMIC EQUITY ANALYSIS OF THE
COUNTY DID IN 2015, WE KNOW
THAT WE NEED TO BUILD THREE
THOUSAND ONE HUNDRED THIRTY
NINE NON-STORE IN AFFORDABLE
RENTALS IN THE NEXT 20 YEARS
AND WE&apos;RE ALREADY BEHIND WE&apos;VE
ONLY BUILT 90 SINCE THEN IN
THAT 55 PAGE REPORT, ONE OF THE
VERY FIRST RECOMMEND POLICY
RECOMMENDATIONS IS ACTUALLY TO
INTRODUCE TRANSIT CORRIDOR
ZONING.
SO THIS IS NOT A NEW IDEA.
THIS IS THIS IS AN IDEA THAT&apos;S
BEEN IN COMMUNITY BEYOND OUR
OWN CITY SINCE 2015 ACTUALLY.
AND IF WE WANT TO TAKE A LOOK
AND EXAMPLE, WE CAN LOOK TO
2013 WHERE I HAD ON PLYMOUTH
ROAD THERE&apos;S A GREATER ANN
ARBOR OBSERVATOR CALL THE
PLYMOUTH ROAD PLAZA OPENING THE
DEVELOPER AND OWNERS THEMSELVES
TALK ABOUT HOW THIS IS AN
EXAMPLE OF INFILL RETAIL SO IF
YOU GO UP IN PLYMOUTH ROAD AND
YOU REMEMBER THAT PARKING LOT
WHICH NOW IS BUSY WITH CAFE
WITH MINORA OWNED BUSINESSES,
MINORITY OWNED BUSINESSES OWNED
BY FOLKS WHO GREW UP IN ANN
ARBOR WENT TO HIGH SCHOOL HERE
IN HANOVER MULTIREGIONAL
MONTLAKE A GENERATIONAL
MINORITY BUSINESS OWNERS ARE
THE MAJORITY IN THAT COMPLEX
AND THAT DEVELOPMENT AT THE END
OF THE ARTICLE GENESYS ACTUALLY
SAYS WE DO BETTER AND BETTER
EVERY MONTH.
I DON&apos;T THINK ANY OF THE FOOD
PLACES THE MALL WE&apos;RE WORRIED
THE DEVELOPER AT THE TIME
POINTS TO HOW THE TWO STOREY
STRUCTURE GIVES MORE INFO BANG
FOR THE BUCK THE SECOND FLOOR
IS OFFICE SPACE.
IT&apos;S CLOSE TO THE SIDEWALK AND
THE DEVELOPER SAYS IT REFLECTS
THE PHILOSOPHY OF MAKING THE
CITY MORE WALKABLE.
ALL FOUR OF THE GROUND FLOOR
BUSINESSES CAN BE ENTERED
EITHER FROM THE PARKING UP OR
FROM THE SIDEWALK SIDE.
I ALSO TOOK THE OPPORTUNITY TO
TALK TO THE ANN ARBOR DISTRICT
LIBRARY DIRECTOR AND HIS
WORRIES ABOUT THE ZONING AND
THE COMMENT WAS UNLESS THE
LIBRARY BURNS DOWN AND NEEDS TO
BE REBUILT, WE WOULD WELCOME A
BIGGER BUILDING.
BUT EVEN HE AND TRUSTEES ARE
FOLLOWING THIS AND GIVEN THAT
THAT WESKIT BRANCH IS THE MOST
VISITED BRANCH OF ALL LIBRARY
BRANCHES AND ACTUALLY IS THE
THE BUSINESS INCR OF THAT
OF THAT PLAZA THAT THAT&apos;S THE
REASON MY TEACHER MAXSTED
THAT&apos;S WHY NICCOLA BOOKS EXPAND
IN SWEETWATERS EXPANDED TO
ANOTHER LOCATION IN THERE.
SO I THINK IF YOU TALK TO THE
FOLKS WHO HAVE BUSINESSES THERE
YOU&apos;LL YOU&apos;LL UNDERSTAND THAT
THERE&apos;S ANTICIPATION FOR
GROWING NEED GROWING RETAIL
NEED GROWING HOUSING ALONG THAT
CORRIDOR I&apos;VE SPOKEN TO IN A
NUMBER OF BUSINESS OWNERS THERE
THEY ARE IN THE EARLY
CONVERSATIONS OF FUNDING
FORMING A BUSINESS ASSOCIATION,
SIR AND I HOPE IS THEY&apos;LL COME
AT THE SECOND READING IN
SUPPORT FOR THE DISCUSSION
COUNCIL MEMBER NILLSON, THANK
YOU.
THAT WAS THAT WAS A WHOLE LOT
TO UNPACK.
I I&apos;M I&apos;M REALLY I&apos;M IN I&apos;M
INTRIGUED BY THE TALKING POINTS
THAT I REGULARLY HEAR THE
PHRASE AFFORDABLE HOUSING
REPEATED OVER AND OVER AGAIN
AND YET NONE OF THE THINGS THAT
WE ARE ACTUALLY TALKING ABOUT
ARE REQUIRING AFFORDABLE
HOUSING.
THE THE GOAL OF GETTING THREE
THOUSAND MORE AFFORDABLE
HOUSING UNITS ARE WE CLEARLY
ADMIT ON THE ONE HAND WELL
OF COURSE THIS ISN&apos;T A SILVER
BULLET.
IT&apos;S NOT GOING TO ACHIEVE IT.
BUT THEN FIVE SECONDS LATER
WE&apos;RE TAP DANCING IN A
DIFFERENT PART OF THE DANCE
FLOOR JUST SUBSTITUTING
AFFORDABLE HOUSING AS A GOAL IN
CONNECTION WITH THIS THE
BIGGEST PROBLEM THAT I HAVE
WITH US IS THERE WERE SO MANY
FORKS IN THE ROAD, SO MANY
OPPORTUNITIES FOR OUR MEMBERS
OF OUR PLANNING COMMISSION, OUR
ORDER AND ORDINANCE REVISION
COMMITTEE, OTHERS TO TO TAKE
INTO ACCOUNT REASONABLE
SUGGESTIONS LIKE FOR INSTANCE
THE STATE AND EISENHOWER
CORRIDOR IS FUNDAMENTALLY VERY,
VERY DIFFERENT THAN THIS ONE.
THE THE THINGS THAT ARE
APPRECIATED AND CHERISHED BY
THE COMMUNITY ON ONE STADIUM
ARE THINGS THAT SIMPLY DO NOT
EXIST ON STATE AND EISENHAUER
ONE WE TALKED ABOUT STATE IN
EISENHOWER WE HAD VIRTUALLY NO
PUSHBACK FROM RESIDENTS WHO
COULD POINT TO THINGS THAT THEY
ENJOYED ABOUT THE CORRIDOR OR
HAZARDS THAT COULD HAPPEN BASED
ON IMPLEMENTING THESE NEW
REQUIREMENTS.
I MEAN IT&apos;S THAT&apos;S THE THING
THAT&apos;S MOST CONCERNING TO ME.
LIKE WE ACTUALLY WENT THROUGH A
PROCESS AND FOLKS WHO HAVE WHO
ARE NOT ELECTED WHO ARE NOT
ACCOUNTABLE TO ANYONE
REPEATEDLY AND CONSISTENTLY
REFUSED TO ACCEPT ANY
SUGGESTION OF OF TWEAKING OR
ADJUSTING.
AND I AND NO ONE HAS OFFERED A
COMPELLING ARGUMENT FOR WHY WHY
WE COULDN&apos;T TAKE INTO ACCOUNT
HOW FUNDAMENTALLY DIFFERENT
THIS IS FROM STATE IN
EISENHOWER, WHY WE COULDN&apos;T
TAKE INTO ACCOUNT CONCERNS THAT
WERE RAISED BY PEOPLE WHO ARE
GOING TO BE REALLY IMPACTED BY
THIS.
I SUPPORTED THE REZONING
OF STATE AND EISENHOWER AND
EVERYBODY AT THIS TABLE IS
AWARE THAT THE CITY IS GROWING
AND NEEDS TO GROW AND NEEDS
MORE HOUSING.
THAT&apos;S NOT WHAT WE&apos;RE TALKING
ABOUT HERE.
WE&apos;RE TALKING ABOUT PUSHING
FORWARD AND RUSHING AHEAD TOO.
YES, WE WENT THROUGH THE PROPER
PROCESS.
I&apos;LL GRANT THAT.
BUT IT&apos;S IT&apos;S REMARKABLE
ANYBODY WHO FOLLOWED THIS
PROCESS CLOSELY TO SEE HOW MANY
HOW MANY CONCERNS WERE RAISED
AND HOW MANY CONCERNS WERE
IGNORED.
I&apos;M NOT GOING TO SUPPORT THIS
AT FIRST READING ALTHOUGH I
REALLY LOOK FORWARD TO THE
PUBLIC HEARING.
I THINK IT&apos;S GOING TO BE REALLY
INTERESTING.
I KNOW WE&apos;RE GOING TO HEAR A
LOT OF THE SAME TALKING POINTS
OVER AND OVER AND OVER AGAIN.
WE&apos;RE GOING TO HEAR A LOT
OF REALLY SPECIFIC NUANCED
ANALYSIS POINTING OUT HOW THIS
COULD HAVE BEEN DONE
DIFFERENTLY AND BETTER FURTHER
DISCUSSION
CONTROVERSAL.
SO I FEEL LIKE SOMETIMES WE
FORGET WE WE HAVE A CHICKEN AND
EGG PROBLEM WHEN WE TALK ABOUT
DEVELOPMENT AND HOUSING AND
ZONING WE HAD AN OH THAT WE I
WAS NOT ON COUNCIL AT THE TIME
BUT THERE WAS AN OPPORTUNITY TO
WELCOME AFFORDABLE HOUSING HERE
CLOSE TO THAT AREA AND THAT WAS
LOCKWOOD.
&gt;&gt; SO WHEN BUSINESS OWNERS AND
THE LIBRARY AT THE TIME HAD
ANTICIPATED LOCKWOOD
POTENTIALLY ANTICIPATED
LOCKWOOD BEING DEVELOPED THERE,
THE DISCUSSION WAS THIS IS
IDEAL FOR HUNDRED LOW INCOME
SENIORS TO BE ABLE TO ACCESS
TRANSPORTATION THAT WAS
AVAILABLE THERE AND WALK TO THE
LIBRARY.
&gt;&gt; FOLKS WHO COULD HAVE WORKED
THERE COULD HAVE COME OFF OF 23
PRETTY EASILY.
THINK A LITTLE BIT BEYOND THAT
STRETCH AND YOU&apos;LL SEE THE
POTENTIAL TO HOW THAT COMMUNITY
CAN REALLY GROW.
&gt;&gt; I&apos;VE JOKED WOW, I&apos;VE JOKED
I&apos;M SURE I&apos;M SURE THERE&apos;S
APPEAL TO LIVING CLOSE TO THE
SKATEPARK AND I HOPE THAT IS
THE CASE.
AND WHEN TALKING TO YOUNG
FAMILIES WHO ATTEND ABBOTT WHO
LIVE IN SECTION HOUSING DOWN
THE ROAD, IT ACTUALLY IS A
SERIOUS THING BECAUSE
SKATEBOARDING IS A SPORT THAT
IS LOW COST DOES NOT REQUIRE
PARENTS TO DRIVE.
AND WHEN THAT PARK WAS ACTUALLY
CONSIDERED IN THE ONSET IT WAS
SUPPOSED TO BE IT WAS A PRIME
SPOT FOR ACTABLE FOR FOLKS WHO
WHO REALLY COULD HAVE ACCESS
THAT PARK DIFFERENTLY THAN
OTHER PARKS.
&gt;&gt; SO BEYOND THAT QUARTER WE
CAN THINK OF LARGE CORPORATIONS
WHO ARE IN PROTEST OF THIS.
I&apos;D LIKE TO TO THINK ABOUT THE
COMMUTERS WHO LIVE THERE AND WE
CAN TALK TO THEM TO FURTHER
DISCUSSION OF GRISWOLD.
&gt;&gt; I THINK YOU&apos;VE SPOKEN TWICE
IN THE MAIN MOTION.
I THINK WE STARTED COUNTING
OVER AGAIN AFTER THE AMENDMENT
AND MANY PEOPLE&apos;S VOTE MORE
THAN TWICE BUT THAT IS NOT TRUE
.
I WAS JUST GOING TO CORRECT AN
UNTRUTH BUT IT&apos;S NOT TRUE.
&gt;&gt; OK, FURTHER DISCUSSION
OF THE CONTRARY DENHA THANK
YOU, MAYOR.
VERY BRIEFLY, I&apos;M GOING TO BE
SUPPORTING THIS HERE AT FIRST
READING AND I ALSO YOU KNOW,
WE&apos;VE HEARD A BIT TONIGHT ABOUT
THE PROCESS AND HOW THIS PLAYED
OUT AND HOW FOLKS COME FORWARD
WITH IDEAS ON HOW TO IMPROVE
THIS AND AND TO MAKE IT BETTER
.
&gt;&gt; I WOULD POINT OUT THAT A
SECOND PART OF THIS PROCESS IS
HAPPENING RIGHT NOW AT THIS
COUNCIL TABLE IN GENERAL IS
THAT FIRST READING WHEN
AMENDMENTS COULD BE OFFERED OR
CHANGES COULD BE PROPOSED FOR
THIS BODY TO DEBATE AND DISCUSS
AS WE ARE ELECTED
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE
COMMUNITY WE ARE NOT SEEING
MUCH THAT TONIGHT.
INSTEAD WE&apos;RE HEARING
OPPOSITION AT FIRST READING AN
OPPOSITION THAT IS BEING
PLANNED AT SECOND READING AND
SO I WOULD SAY I ENCOURAGE
FOLKS TO CONTINUE TO BE PART
OF THIS PROCESS TO PROPOSE
AMENDMENTS AND CHANGES WHEN
THEY THINK SOMETHING CAN BE
APPROVED IMPROVED.
BUT UNFORTUNATELY I THINK THAT
WE&apos;RE HEARING A LOT ABOUT THAT.
BUT REALLY THERE&apos;S JUST AN
EFFORT TO OPPOSE THIS TONIGHT.
SO I&apos;M GOING TO BE VOTING YES
ON FIRST READING AND LOOK
FORWARD TO THE PUBLIC
DISCUSSION AT THE NEXT MEETING
FOR THE DISCUSSION FROM MY PART
I AM EXCITED TO TO BE IN
SUPPORT OF THIS THIS EVENING.
I THINK THE EXPANSION OF TCCC
ONE WILL WILL IMPROVE WILL
IMPROVE THE COMMUNITY WE ARE
ALL OF OUR EFFORTS ARE
IMPERFECT
, ITERATIVE AND THIS
OF COURSE WILL BE BUT THE
BOTTOM LINE IS THAT THE THE
EXISTING ZONING ON THE CORRIDOR
DOES NOT MEET OUR ASPIRATIONS.
IT DOES NOT MEET OUR HOUSING
ASPIRATIONS.
IT DOES NOT MEET OUR COMMERCIAL
IT DOES NOT MEET OUR HOUSING.
ASPIRATIONS.
IT TRAINABILITY ASPIRATIONS,
IT DOES NOT MEET OUR HOUSING.
DOESN&apos;T MEET OUR OUR PEDESTRIAN
IT TRAINABILITY ASPIRATIONS,
AND CYCLING AND EVEN VEHICULAR
DOESN&apos;T MEET OUR OUR PEDESTRIAN
SAFETY ASPIRATIONS.
AND CYCLING AND EVEN VEHICULAR
AND I BELIEVE THAT IN THOSE
SAFETY ASPIRATIONS.
AREAS THAT ONE A CONTEXT
AND I BELIEVE THAT IN THOSE
SENSITIVE DESIGNATION WILL BE A
AREAS THAT ONE A CONTEXT
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.
SENSITIVE DESIGNATION WILL BE A
IT WILL NOT BE THE END OF THE
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.
STORY BECAUSE YOU KNOW, WE WILL
IT WILL NOT BE THE END OF THE
CONTINUE TO WORK WE WILL
STORY BECAUSE YOU KNOW, WE WILL
CONTINUE TO OBSERVE WHAT CAN BE
CONTINUE TO WORK WE WILL
IMPROVED AND WILL WORK AND WE
CONTINUE TO OBSERVE WHAT CAN BE
WILL WE WILL STRIVE TO DO SO.
IMPROVED AND WILL WORK AND WE
BUT THE BOTTOM LINE IS THAT
WILL WE WILL STRIVE TO DO SO.
THIS THIS WILL BE A SUBSTANTIAL
BUT THE BOTTOM LINE IS THAT
IMPROVEMENT IN THE IN THE SHORT
THIS THIS WILL BE A SUBSTANTIAL
AND LONG TERM AND I&apos;M EXCITED
IMPROVEMENT IN THE IN THE SHORT
THAT IT&apos;LL BE MOVING FORWARD.
AND LONG TERM AND I&apos;M EXCITED
FURTHER DISCUSSION ROLL-CALL
THAT IT&apos;LL BE MOVING FORWARD.
VOTE PLEASE START WITH COUNCIL
FURTHER DISCUSSION ROLL-CALL
DISH COUNCIL.
VOTE PLEASE START WITH COUNCIL
&gt;&gt; YES, HOUSEWORKER AS WELL.
DISH COUNCIL.
NO, THAT&apos;S OUR SONG.
&gt;&gt; YES, HOUSEWORKER AS WELL.
YES COUNTERPROGRAM.
NO, THAT&apos;S OUR SONG.
YES THAT&apos;S RIGHT.
YES COUNTERPROGRAM.
YES.
YES THAT&apos;S RIGHT.
WE&apos;RE TAYLOR YES.
YES.
KAZMIR IA YES HOUSEWARE NELSON
WE&apos;RE TAYLOR YES.
NO NO BRICKS.
KAZMIR IA YES HOUSEWARE NELSON
&gt;&gt; YES SIR.
NO NO BRICKS.
AMAWI NO ELSMORE HAYNER NO
&gt;&gt; YES SIR.
MOTION CARRIES LET US TAKE A
AMAWI NO ELSMORE HAYNER NO
BREAK IT&apos;S 953.
MOTION CARRIES LET US TAKE A
WE&apos;LL RETURN AT THREE
WE&apos;RE
BACK AFTER A SHORT BREAK D.C.
ONE RESOLUTION TO RESTRICT
TURNS RED DOWNTOWN MOVE BY
COUNCIL MEMBER BRIGG SECOND I
BY COUNCIL A GRAND DISCUSSION
PLEASE OF D.C. ONE COUNCIL
MEMBER BRIGS.
THIS WAS INTRODUCED AT TURN ON
MY MIC.
SO THIS WAS INTRODUCED AT THE
LAST COUNCIL MEETING AND AS
YOU&apos;LL RECALL, WE POSTPONED IT
AT THE REQUEST OF LEGAL OFFICE
.
&gt;&gt; I&apos;M GOING TO OWE SORRY I
JUST TRIED TO SEND YOU GUYS A
MESSAGE IN IT DELETED ONE
SECOND.
&gt;&gt; APPARENTLY I CAN&apos;T TALK AND
SEND MESSAGES THE SAME TIME SO
I AM SENDING AROUND SOME
PROPOSED AMENDMENTS JUST
BRIEFLY TO DISCUSS WHAT THE
PURPOSE THIS RESOLUTION IS IS
RESTRICTING TURNS ON RED LIGHTS
DOWNTOWN AND THE GOAL OF THIS
IS TO IMPROVE PEDESTRIAN SAFETY
.
&gt;&gt; I THIS IS SOMETHING THAT&apos;S
BEEN LONG RECOMMENDED IN OUR
COMMUNITY FROM THE PEDESTRIAN
SAFETY AND ACCESS TASK FORCE
REPORT OF TUFFIN.
IT&apos;S BEEN REINFORCED BY OUR
RECENTLY UPDATED TRANSPORTATION
PLAN AND IT&apos;S A BEST PRACTICE
RECOMMENDED BY THE FEDERAL
HIGHWAY ADMINISTRATION.
SO IT WAS FIRST INTRODUCED TO
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION IN
AUGUST AND THERE WERE SOME
MEETINGS WITH STAFF THAT DAY
AND IT WAS UNANIMOUSLY ADOPTED
BY TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION
AND BROUGHT FORWARD HERE.
&gt;&gt; SO I SENT AROUND SOME
AMENDMENTS FOR FOLKS TO LOOK AT
WHAT IS THE RECOMMENDED
AMENDMENT.
&gt;&gt; LET&apos;S DEAL WITH THEM IN
ORDER IF YOU PLEASE.
SO MOVE THE SO I WILL YEAH.
I&apos;LL MOVE THE FIRST AMENDMENT
THAT IS SORRY I NEED TO PULL UP
THE MESSAGE THAT I JUST SENT
YOU WILL SEE IN THE EMAIL THAT
YOU JUST RECEIVED THE SECOND TO
LAST RESOLVED CLAUSE ADDS THAT
BASICALLY THIS APPLIES THE
SCOPE OF THE WHERE IT APPLIES
BUT IT SAYS ON STREETS UNDER
CITY CITIES JURISDICTION AND TO
THE EXTENT PERMISSIBLE BY LAW
THAT&apos;S AIMED TO ADDRESS THE
FACT THAT WE CAN&apos;T WE DON&apos;T
HAVE CONTROL AND THAT ROADWAY.
&gt;&gt; IS A SECOND SECOND BECAUSE
THE THIS AMENDMENT FROM THE
BODY WHEN WE THE BODY SECOND
AND THE SECOND AMENDMENT READS
RESOLVED CITY COUNCIL DIRECTS
THE CITY ADMINISTRATOR TO
PROVIDE DATA ON ENFORCEMENT
ACTIVITIES ANNUALLY INCLUDING
DEMOGRAPHIC DATA WHICH INCLUDES
RACE AND ETHNICITY.
&gt;&gt; THE DRIVER DURING TRAFFIC
STOPS IS THERE A SECOND SECOND
BY COUNCIL MEMBER ASONG JUST
MEMBER BRIGS.
YEAH, THANK YOU.
AND THE PURPOSE OF THIS WE HAD
SOME DISCUSSIONS AROUND EQUITY
IN THE LAST MEETING.
I THINK THAT MANY OF THEM WERE
UNFOUNDED AND WE CERTAINLY
RECEIVED A REPORT FROM THAT.
I THINK OTHER CO-SPONSORS ARE
GOING TO SPEAK TO IN MORE
DETAIL.
BUT RECENTLY IN CONVERSATIONS
WITH INCOMING COUNCIL MEMBER
FROM THE FIRST QUARTER COUNCIL
MEMBER CYNTHIA HARRISON, ONE
OF THE THINGS THAT SHE RAISED
WAS SORT THE POLICING OF A
BLACK AND BROWN BODIES AND THE
CONCERN AROUND HOW NEW
ENFORCEMENT ACTIVITIES MIGHT
PLAY OUT.
AND SO I THINK ONE OF THE
THINGS THAT WE CAN BE DOING AND
WE SHOULD BE DOING ALL
ACTIVITIES IS JUST EVALUATING
THEM, SEEING WHAT THE IMPACT
OF THEM ARE.
AND SO THAT&apos;S THE PURPOSE
OF THIS JUST TO GATHER DATA, MY
GUESS IS THAT IT WILL
EVENTUALLY BE ADDED TO A LIST
OF OTHER DATA THAT WE&apos;RE
COLLECTING COUNCIL MEMBER
AMAURI.
&gt;&gt; UM, YOU KNOW, I STILL HAVE
THAT BRIDGEPORT REPORT THAT WE
GOT WHEN THIS COUNCIL WAS FIRST
HOW WE CAN BE ALL MORE
PROFESSIONAL AND SHOULD GET
THAT FRAMED.
YOU KNOW, THE ISSUE OF EQUITY,
THE CONCERNS I&apos;M NOT SURE HOW
SOMEONE CAN JUST DISMISS THEM
AS UNFOUNDED AS QUICKLY AS IT
WAS JUST DISMISSED MY CONCERNS
OF EQUITY DON&apos;T NECESSARILY
JUST RELY ON THE PIGMENT
OF ONE&apos;S SKIN.
I KNOW THAT&apos;S ALL THE RAGE OR
HOW SOMEONE IDENTIFIES WHAT
PRONOUN THEY USE OR DON&apos;T USE
MY ISSUE WITH EQUITY AND WILL
CONTINUE TO BE THE ECONOMIC
INJUSTICE.
&gt;&gt; AND I THINK THIS BOARD GOING
FORWARD WILL LOSE OUT IN THIS
COMMUNITY WILL LOSE OUT WHEN WE
TALK ABOUT ECONOMIC JUSTICE,
THE ECONOMIC INJUSTICE.
BUT I BUT I DIGRESS THIS THIS
LAST THIS LAST AMENDMENT REALLY
TO ME DOESN&apos;T SEEM NECESSARY.
PAC HAS BEEN WORKING ON THIS
THE TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION
ALSO WORKED ON THIS THE
DISABILITIES COMMISSION I THINK
CHIMED IN ON THIS FOR THE
POLICE AND A CITY ADMINISTRATOR
TO COLLECT DATA ON THIS AND
MANY OTHER FACTORS AND REPORT
THEM BACK TO COUNCIL FOR ALL
TRAFFIC STOPS IN THE CITY
OF ANN ARBOR.
SO I NOT SURE IF WHAT THIS IS
AIMING TO DO BUT UM I QUITE
FRANKLY THINK IT&apos;S UNNECESSARY
FOR THE DISCUSSION COUNCIL
MEMBER GRAMBLING&apos;S SO THANK YOU
SO MUCH.
&gt;&gt; UM, SO I HAVE A FEW THINGS
TO RESPOND TO THAT UM ONE I
THINK THIS WAS A YOU KNOW, A
CONCERN THAT WAS BROUGHT UP IN
IN GOOD FAITH TO COUNCILMAN
BRIGGS AND IT&apos;S A RESPONSE THAT
IS IN LINE WITH SOME OF OUR
OTHER PRACTICES AND WHEN WE WE
WANT TO DO THIS HOPEFULLY OR
MANY OF US DO BECAUSE WE THINK
IT&apos;S GOING TO IMPROVE SAFETY.
BUT YOU KNOW, THERE ARE ALWAYS
TRADE OFFS AND CONCERNS AND SO
I THINK THIS IS A REASONABLE
REQUEST BUT I THINK THIS WILL
BE KIND OF A TWOFER BOTH TO THE
THIRD AMENDMENT AND AND THEN
RESOLUTION OVERALL.
&gt;&gt; I WAS SO EXCITED TO SEE IN
THIS MEMO FROM MR. TONY THAT WE
HAD OUR FIRST EQUITY ANALYSIS
NOW THAT WE HAVE AN EQUITY
OFFICER AT THE CITY AND IT
RESPONDS TO ACTUALLY A LOT
OF CUSTOMER ALWAYS CONCERNS.
SO I MEAN I JUST READ THE FIRST
SENTENCE THAT WAS THE SUMMARY
RESTRICTING TURNS ON RIGHT IN
DOWNTOWN IS EXPECTED TO
DECREASE NEGATIVE IMPACTS ON
BIPAC POPULATIONS LOWER SOCIO
ECONOMIC STATUS INDIVIDUALS AND
INDIVIDUALS OVER 50 AS DETAILED
BELOW.
&gt;&gt; SO OUR EQUITY OFFICER ISN&apos;T
LIMITING THIS ISSUE OF EQUITY
ONLY TO RACE BUT ALSO LOOKING
AT SOCIOECONOMIC STATUS AS WELL
AS AGE IN THIS ANALYSIS AND YOU
CAN SEE IT IN YOUR HACKET IF
YOU&apos;RE INTERESTED.
THERE&apos;S SOME NICE YOU
INFOGRAPHICS AS WELL.
SO AND IT DOES REFERENCE ARE
YOU KNOW, APPROACHING THE INDEX
AND IT&apos;S PRETTY EXCITING.
&gt;&gt; IT DOES SPEAK TO OUTREACH
AND EDUCATION.
SO WE KNOW THAT WELL WE I LIKE
THE IDEA OF COLLECTING THIS
DATA THAT IN THE FIRST MONTH
ISH WE WOULDN&apos;T BE ISSUING ANY
TICKETS AND THAT ANY
ENFORCEMENT EFFORTS WOULD BE
PURELY EDUCATIONAL.
I DO I WOULD BE REMISS IF I
DIDN&apos;T RESPOND QUICKLY TO
COUNTERMELODIES CONCERNS
THAT
SOME OF THESE THINGS SEEM
SOMEWHAT TRENDY LIKE PRONOUNS
INTRODUCING YOUR PRONOUNS AS
MANY OF US DID WHEN WE WERE ON
ZOOME IS SOMETHING THAT CAN BE
DONE JUST TO MAKE OTHER PEOPLE
FEEL COMFORTABLE AT REALLY NO
COST TO YOU AND TO DENIGRATE
PEOPLE WHO CHOOSE TO MAKE
OTHERS FEEL COMFORTABLE WANTING
TO EXPRESS THEIR GENDER
IDENTITY.
&gt;&gt; SPEAK TO THE TOPIC.
&gt;&gt; AN UNFORTUNATE REMARK TO ME
UM I WAS I WAS I WAS
MAINTAINING ORDER NOT CUTTING
OFF.
&gt;&gt; COUNCIL MEMBER YOU HAVE
THIRTY MORE SECONDS.
I THINK I MADE MYSELF CLEAR
COUNCIL MEMBER SOANE I JUST
WANT TO GO A LITTLE BIT MORE IN
DEPTH ON THE EQUITY ANALYSIS.
THIS IS WORK THAT INCLUDES
REPORTING OUT FROM THE 2020
WASHINGTON COUNTING OPPORTUNITY
INDEX FOR THOSE WHO ARE UNAWARE
THIS INDEX WAS WORKED ON BY THE
U OF M SCHOOL SOCIAL WORK AND
THE FOURTH SCHOOL POVERTY
SOLUTION CENTER ALONG WITH
OFFICE OF ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
WITH THE COUNTY AND IN THE
ANALYSIS IT POINTS TO HOW THE
IMPACT TO VULNERABLE
POPULATIONS THE SCORE ITSELF
INCLUDES A COMPOSITE HEALTH JOB
ACCESS, ECONOMIC WELLBEING,
COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT, STABILITY
.
THESE ARE COMPLICATED
DEMOGRAPHICS AND I ALSO INCLUDE
A ZOOM ON THE AREA THE
CATCHMENT AREA WHERE THIS WOULD
BE ENACTED AND IT POINTS TO HOW
MUCH OF THE AREA HAS A LOW
ACCESS TO OPPORTUNITY INDEX AND
THAT THIS WOULD ADDRESS THE
NEEDS VULNERABLE POPULATIONS
WHO WOULD BENEFIT FROM A NO
TURN ON RED RESTRICTION BY
INCREASING SAFETY ESPECIALLY
THOSE ESPECIALLY AMONG THOSE
THAT RELY ON WALKING, BIKIN
TRANSIT AND OTHER FORMS
OF MOBILITY.
I REALLY APPRECIATED THE POINT
THE ANALYSIS MADE ON ELDERLY
INDIVIDUALS AND HOW 11 CRASHES
INVOLVED PERSONS OVER THE AGE
OF 50 AND THIS IS BASED ON
FEDERAL HIGHWAY ADMINISTRATION
RESEARCH AND TECHNOLOGY.
SO THANK YOU TO THE EFFORTS
OF STAFF FOR PULLING THIS
TOGETHER AND REQUESTS
OF COUNCIL MEMBERS.
I THINK THAT PRETTY MUCH
ANSWERS HOPEFULLY THAT ANSWERS
THE NEED FOR AN EQUITY REVIEW
ON THE IMPACT ON THE MOST
RUMBALL COMMITTEE MEMBERS.
I&apos;M SORRY.
YEAH, I DON&apos;T THINK I WAS
DENIGRATING ANYBODY IN MY PRIOR
COMMENTS.
AGAIN, I WISH EVERYONE WOULD GO
BACK AND READ THAT
RECOMMENDATION FROM BRIDGE
BOARD FROM TWO YEARS AGO BUT I
I JUST REFERRED TO WINDOW
DRESSING.
I THINK I WOULD CALL A WINDOW
DRESSING
THE AND I DID READ THE
MEMO FROM OUR CITY
ADMINISTRATOR.
THANK YOU.
I DON&apos;T THINK IT INCLUDES
COLLECTING UM, PERSON&apos;S INCOME
HOW WE&apos;RE GOING TO KNOW IF THIS
IS BEING APPLIED TO EQUITABLY
AND FOR THOSE UH YEAH.
WE COLLECTED INCOME I GUESS A
COUPLE OF THINGS HERE.
I GOT TO SAY THE ADMINISTRATOR
IS ARE WE ALREADY COLLECTING
THIS INFORMATION WITH
RESOLUTIONS THAT HAVE BEEN
BROUGHT FORWARD BY XPAC AND
SECONDLY, WHETHER WE&apos;RE GOING
TO BE ABLE TO COLLECT LEGALLY
OR PRACTICALLY INCOME PEOPLE
WHO ARE ISSUED TICKETS
, I&apos;M NOT
SURE HOW WE&apos;RE GOING TO HOW WE
WOULD GO ABOUT COLLECTING THE
INCOME.
UM, THE THE REQUEST THAT I&apos;M
FAMILIAR WITH WAS NOT ONLY
ASKING THAT WE COLLECT
DEMOGRAPHIC DATA ON THE DRIVER
BUT THEY ALSO ASKED FOR US TO
COLLECT IT.
MY RECOLLECTION FOR EVERYBODY
IN THE CAR AND TO ME THAT&apos;S
PROBLEMATIC BECAUSE WHEN AN
OFFICER STARTS QUESTIONING
WHO&apos;S IN THE CAR IF THAT&apos;S NOT
PROFILING, I DON&apos;T KNOW WHAT IS
THAT&apos;S HOW IT&apos;S VIEWED.
SO IT&apos;S WE WE DID WE HAD ISSUES
WITH THAT REQUEST.
UM, SO WHAT IS BEING DONE WITH
THOSE CALLS THAT PARK HAS AS
WELL AS AS WELL AS THE OTHER
COMMISSIONS ON COLLECTING THE
DATA FROM TRAFFIC STOPS OR
TRAFFIC CRASHES?
ARE WE WE PURSUING ANYTHING HAS
WILL ANYTHING BE DONE UNLESS
COUNCIL TAKES MORE ACTION OR IS
WE WE&apos;VE COMMITTED TO PROVIDING
DATA TO APOC UH, TO BE HONEST
WITH THE COUNCIL AND REGARDING
SPECIFIC CRASH DATA I&apos;D RATHER
DO MY HOMEWORK AND GIVE YOU A
BETTER ANSWER THAN SORT
OF GOING OFF CUFF HERE TONIGHT
.
&gt;&gt; THESE WERE ISSUES THAT WERE
DEALT WITH WHEN CHIEF COX WAS
HERE.
WE HAVEN&apos;T REALLY BEEN IN I
HAVEN&apos;T BEEN IN ANY MEETINGS
WITH IG WITH INTERIM CHIEF
METZER TO GET A CURRENT STATUS
BUT I&apos;D BE HAPPY TO GET THAT.
THE ONLY ISSUE I RAISED THOUGH
WAS AROUND THE REQUEST THAT WAS
MADE TO ME WAS TO APPROVE OR
SUPPORT GETTING DEMOGRAPHIC
DATA ON EVERY PERSON IN THE CAR
GOT COUNCIL MEMBERS HAYNER
GRISWOLD BRIGS AND PERHAPS WE
CAN VOTE ON THIS AMENDMENT TO
GET BACK TO THE MAIN MISSION
DISTRICT.
WELL, THANKS FOR CLEARING THAT
UP, MR. MAYOR.
I THINK WE&apos;RE STILL TALKING TO
TO THE AMENDMENT HERE.
SO I MEAN I DON&apos;T HAVE A
PROBLEM WITH THE FIRST ONE.
I DON&apos;T HAVE A PREFERENCE.
I UNDERSTAND WHERE THAT&apos;S
COMING FROM WITH THE SECOND
RESOLVED CLAUSE I THINK IT
WOULD BE I THINK WE COULD AVOID
THE WHOLE OF THE DEBATE HERE
AND LET OTHER OVERARCHING
EFFORTS UNDERWAY AT THE
ADMINISTRATIVE LEVEL AND ALSO
AT A POLICY LEVEL BY STRIKING
THE LAST LINE I&apos;M GOING TO MOVE
THAT WE STRIKE EVERYTHING AFTER
THE WORD ANNUALLY LET&apos;S THIS
STRIKE INCLUDING DEMOGRAPHIC
DATA AND I THINK IT&apos;S KIND
OF HORRIFIC TO CONSIDER THAT IN
THAT WE&apos;RE WE&apos;RE REALLY, REALLY
THINKING ABOUT HAVING A POLICE
OFFICER PUT IN A STANDARD FORM.
&gt;&gt; THE OTHER THE RACE, THE
ETHNICITY OR WHATEVER OF OTHER
PEOPLE IN A CAR THAT IS A GROSS
VIOLATION OF THE FIRST
AMENDMENT RIGHT TO ASSEMBLE
FREELY.
&gt;&gt; IS THERE A SECOND IS THERE A
SECOND SECOND MY COUNCILMAN
ALLOW I&apos;LL OBSERVE THAT IT&apos;S
NOT THE OTHER PERSONS IN THE
CAR COUNCIL MEMBER.
IT&apos;S JUST A DRIVER.
OK, WELL I&apos;M STILL ON A STRIKE
THAT I MOVE TO STRIKE THAT FROM
THIS AMENDMENT DISCUSSION
OF THAT AMENDMENT.
&gt;&gt; I ONLY DO SO BECAUSE I DON&apos;T
BELIEVE IT&apos;S NECESSARY.
I NEED COUNCILOR NELSON
INFERRING A POINT OF ORDER.
&gt;&gt; THANK YOU.
YEAH.
I JUST NEED CLARIFICATION
OF WHAT THE WHAT IS WHAT IS
YOUR PROPOSAL, COUNCILMAN
HAYNER?
&gt;&gt; WE ARE WE ARE TALKING THAT
THERE ARE TWO AMENDMENTS.
THE FIRST WAS BY ACCLAMATION
WAS FRIENDLY THE BODY THE
SECOND IS THE ADDED RESOLVE
CLAUSE IN RED THAT COUNCILOR
BRIGGS READ OUT LOUD.
&gt;&gt; I WOULD PROPOSE THAT WE DO
ASK DIRECT THE CITY
ADMINISTRATOR TO PROVIDE DATA
ON ENFORCEMENT ACTIVITIES
ANNUALLY PERIOD.
IT IS THE DELETION OF THAT
SECOND CLAUSE IN THE THIRD IN
THE THIRD RESULT THE PROPOSED
THIRD RESOLVE CLAUSE TO
UNDERSTAND.
&gt;&gt; YEAH I UNDERSTAND.
I GUESS I HAVE A COMMENT ON THE
AMENDMENT.
I DON&apos;T I DON&apos;T HAVE A PROBLEM
WITH THE AMENDMENT.
I DON&apos;T HAVE A PROBLEM WITH US
I SHOULD SAY NO I SHOULD SAY I
DON&apos;T HAVE A PROBLEM WITH THAT
LANGUAGE AND I&apos;M I DON&apos;T
UNDERSTAND THE AMENDMENT IF WE
ARE AH IF WE HAVE CONDITIONS
THAT ARE ALREADY URGING US TO
COLLECT THIS KIND OF DATA TO
UNDERSTAND HOW OUR LAW
ENFORCEMENT IS OPERATING, I
CERTAINLY WANT TO UNDERSTAND IF
THIS PARTICULAR ORDINANCE IS
TRIGGERING AN IMBALANCED LAW
ENFORCEMENT ACTION ON
DISPROPORTIONATE IMPACT ON
PEOPLE AND ACTUALLY I GUESS I I
ALSO I MAYBE THIS IS A
RIDICULOUS QUESTION BUT ISN&apos;T
RACE OR ETHNICITY ALREADY NOTED
ON ON A TICKET?
I MEAN IS THAT NOT SOMETHING
THAT IS WRITTEN DOWN?
I GUESS I HAVEN&apos;T GOTTEN A
TICKET RECENTLY ENOUGH TO
REMEMBER I MEAN I I REMEMBER MY
MOTHER GETTING A TICKET YEARS
AGO AND BEING OFFENDED BY THE
FACT THAT SHE WAS IDENTIFIED AS
A MAN ON THE TICKET.
THAT&apos;S BEEN THIRTY YEARS AGO.
WHAT KIND OF INFORMATION IS
TYPICALLY PUT ON A TICKET?
MAYBE ONE OF OUR MR TONY JUNIOR
OFFICERS COULD TELL US
DEJECTEDLY MR TONY INFORMATION
TO ANSWER THE QUESTION MAYOR
TAYLOR MAY I TRY INFORMATION
FROM THE DRIVER&apos;S LICENSE WILL
BE NOTED ON A TRAFFIC TICKET.
&gt;&gt; SO OK, WELL THAT&apos;S AND A
RACE AND ETHNICITY IS ON OUR
DRIVER&apos;S LICENSE IS IN NO I
THINK IT&apos;S JUST RACE ETHNICITY
BUT I&apos;M NOT SURE ON THAT.
OK, WELL I&apos;M NOT GOING TO
SUPPORT MAN I&apos;M SORRY I AND
MAYBE IT FEELS LIKE A BELT AND
SUSPENDERS IF WE ARE COMING AT
THIS FROM OTHER DIRECTIONS AND
THIS IS THERE IS A MOVE FROM
OTHER BODIES TO TO GET THIS
INFORMATION BUT I THINK IT&apos;S
FINE TO REITERATE THAT THIS IS
DEMOGRAPHIC THIS IS DATA THAT
WE WOULD LIKE TO BE LIKE TO NO
FURTHER DISCUSSION THE
AMENDMENT TO THE AMENDMENT.
MR TONY, JUST TO PROVIDE SOME
CLARITY ON JUST ON THIS ONE
ISSUE THAT REGARDING DATA THE
GATHERING
OF DATA ON ITS FACE
IS SOMETHING THAT IS PROMOTE IT
AND SUPPORT IT BECAUSE THAT&apos;S
THE WAY YOU DETERMINE IF THERE
IS A DISPARATE IMPACT.
SO THERE ARE PLENTY OF WAYS
THAT THIS ITEM THAT&apos;S LISTED
HERE IS SUPPORTED AND ADDRESSED
AND THERE IS A NEED FOR THAT
KIND OF INFORMATION.
&gt;&gt; THE SENSITIVITY OF IT.
&gt;&gt; THE BEST WAY I CAN PUT IT
SOMETIMES IT IS NOT IMMEDIATELY
OBVIOUS THE RACE OR ETHNICITY
OF THE PERSON YOU&apos;RE TALKING TO
AND WHEN THE OFFICER ASKED THEM
THAT QUESTION WELL WHAT RACE OR
ETHNIC BACKGROUND ARE YOU YOU
HAVE A PROBLEM.
SO IF IT&apos;S GATHERED AND WE WILL
ACCEPT THE OFFICER MAKING
ASSUMPTIONS BASED ON SITE,
THAT&apos;S ONE THING.
BUT IF THERE&apos;S A PROBING TO GET
AT IT, IT BECOMES PROBLEMATIC.
COUNCILMAN RIMAWI BREAKTHROUGH
HAYNER ON THE AMENDMENT.
&gt;&gt; SO IN YOUR CONVERSATIONS
I&apos;VE BEEN INVOLVED WITH WITH
THE PARK AND OTHERS ABOUT THIS
IS LEFT TO THE OFFICER&apos;S
DISCRETION AS TO FILL IN WHAT
THEY BELIEVE THE ANSWERS TO
THESE QUESTIONS AND DATA FIELDS
.
I&apos;M JUST SLIGHTLY CONFUSED AS
TO WHERE THAT ASK AND REQUEST
IS ALL TRAFFIC STOP DATA THAT
WE THAT THOSE BODIES RECENTLY
ASKED FOR AND I THOUGHT I COULD
BE WRONG THAT THIS COUNCIL
APPROVED PERHAPS NOT YET BUT I
BELIEVE THEY WERE GOING TO BE
ASKING THIS COUNCIL TO DIRECT
THE CITY ADMINISTRATOR TO
REPORT OUT THIS INFORMATION ON
ALL TRAFFIC STOPS, NOT JUST
TURN ON REDDS AND SO NOT THAT&apos;S
THAT&apos;S THE PROBLEM I HAVE WITH
THIS AMENDMENT.
IT IS IT IS TO TO NARROW IT
DOESN&apos;T GO FAR ENOUGH IN THE
EFFORTS TO COLLECT THE DATA ON
ALL TRAFFIC STOPS AND MORE THAN
JUST TRAFFIC STOPS, TRAFFIC
CRASHES BECAUSE THAT WE HAVE
FOUND TO BE FILLED WITH LESS
BIAS THAN THE TRAFFIC STOPS FOR
CERTAIN DIFFERENT NUMBER
OF REASONS THAT I WON&apos;T GO INTO
RIGHT NOW WHERE WE ARE WITH
THAT AND I JUST CAN&apos;T SUPPORT
THIS.
I THINK THERE NEEDS TO BE A
BETTER, BIGGER POLICY
DISCUSSION AND ADOPTION FOR
THIS KIND OF THING AND IT
SHOULDN&apos;T JUST BE, YOU KNOW, A
RESOLUTION AMENDMENT AT THIS
POINT RIGHT NOW THERE NEEDS TO
BE A BIGGER POLICY CHANGE.
CATHAR BRIGS AND HAYNER ON THE
AMENDMENTS TO THE AMENDMENT
THEN PERHAPS WE CAN VOTE ON
THAT AND GET ON THE AMENDMENTS
AND GET BACK.
&gt;&gt; COUNCILOR BRIGGS.
YEAH I AGREE THIS IS VERY
NARROW AND I AGREE A BROADER
EFFORT NEEDS TO BE DONE.
HOWEVER WE HAVE NOT STARTED
THAT AND THAT IS SOMETHING THAT
WE NEED TO SEE WE NEED TO HAVE
IN OUR COMMUNITY.
IT&apos;S SOMETHING THAT&apos;S AVAILABLE
IN MANY OTHER COMMUNITIES AND
WE SHOULD HAVE AN ANNUAL REPORT
FROM OUR POLICE DEPARTMENT.
WE SHOULD HAVE ANNUAL DATA
REGARDING DISPARITIES ON A WIDE
VARIETY OF DIFFERENT DATA
POINTS THAT WE CAN COLLECT ON.
THIS IS SIMPLY ONE SMALL STEP
MOVING IN THAT DIRECTION
BECAUSE IT IS AN OPPORTUNITY
WHERE WE ARE INCREASING
ENFORCEMENT AND QUESTIONS HAVE
ARISEN ABOUT WHETHER THAT MIGHT
HAVE DISPARATE IMPACTS IN OUR
COMMUNITY AND SO THAT&apos;S WHY
THAT&apos;S INCLUDED ERM I WILL NOT
SUPPORT THE THE THE USE
OF REMOVING THAT THIS IS
SOMETHING THAT I KNOW IS
READILY AVAILABLE DATA ON
TRAFFIC STOPS AND OTHER
COMMUNITIES AND SO I FEEL
CONFIDENT THAT OUR OUR POLICE
DEPARTMENT CAN FIND A
ACCEPTABLE WAY TO COLLECT THAT
DATA.
&gt;&gt; AND I WANT TO BE CLEAR THIS
IS JUST ON A DRIVER MOVING
FORWARD SO THIS IS TO TO
ADDRESS THE ONE ONE ISSUE THAT
I FELT WAS RAISED BY A MEMBER
OF OUR COMMUNITY THAT THAT THAT
I FELT LIKE I NEEDED TO BE
ADDRESSED.
COUNCILOR HAYNER.
&gt;&gt; YEAH.
THANKS, MAYOR.
MR MAYOR.
I MEAN I THINK IT&apos;S I GET WHERE
THIS IS COMING FROM.
I JUST MOVE TO STRIKE IT
BECAUSE I JUST DON&apos;T WANT PEACE
IN THESE POLICIES.
I THINK THESE POLICIES SHOULD
BE OVERARCHING AND I AGREE WHEN
THE FOLKS COME UP HERE AND THEY
SAY HEY WE NEED TO HAVE THIS
DATA AVAILABLE TO US AND WE SAW
A COUPLE OF YEARS BACK WHEN
THEY DID AN ANALYSIS OF THE
COUNTY&apos;S TREATMENT OF DRIVERS,
WE SAW HUGE DISPARITIES IN THE
WAY THEY TREATED AND PULLOVERS
AND SO ON.
BUT WE SHOULDN&apos;T JUST BE
PATIENT IN ONE TYPE OF TICKET
AT A TIME.
IT SHOULD BE A WHOLESALE CHANGE
THAT&apos;S MADE TO OUR REPORTING
ACTIVITIES AND SO THAT&apos;S WHY I
MOVE TO STRIKE IT.
&gt;&gt; SO WE VOTE YES TO STRIKE IT
HERE AND I HOPE THAT THE NEXT
WEEK OR IN THE NEAR FUTURE WE
WILL HAVE A WHOLESALE CHANGE TO
THIS TYPE OF REPORTING.
NOW I CAN&apos;T LET IT GO BY
WITHOUT COMMENTING SOMEHOW ON
THE CURIOUS TURMOIL WE&apos;VE
CREATED HERE WHERE WE HAVE
EQUITY ANALYSIS OF THIS.
IT SAYS THAT A RIGHT TURN ON
RED IS RIGHT, TURNS ON RED
DISPROPORTIONATELY AFFECTS
CERTAIN GROUPS.
&gt;&gt; WE HAD AN OUTCRY WHEN
SOMEONE ELSE SUGGESTED THAT WE
DO AN EQUITY ANALYSIS OF THE
MAKEUP OF OUR APARTMENTS IN OUR
COMMUNITY OF RENTERS IN OUR
COMMUNITY AND NOW WE&apos;RE SAYING
THAT PEOPLE WHO THIS EQUITY
ANALYSIS SAYS THAT IT&apos;S LIKELY
THAT CERTAIN GROUPS ARE NOT
DRIVING CARS AND YET WE WANT TO
KNOW HOW MANY PEOPLE OF THAT
GROUP ARE DRIVING A CAR AND GOT
TO TAKE A POOR TURN RIGHT.
I READ THE WHOLE THING JUST
KIND OF ODD AND I WOULD ALSO
SUGGEST THE DEMOGRAPHIC DATA
THAT WOULD BE PUT FORWARD FROM
THE AMOUNT OF TICKETS THAT MAY
OR MAY NOT BE WRITTEN ON THIS
TOPIC WILL BE MINUSCULE
COMPARED TO THE TOTAL NUMBER
OF TICKETS THAT ARE WRITTEN IN
THE COMMUNITY AND REALLY NOT
ENOUGH FACTUAL TEST OF WHAT&apos;S
HAPPENING OUT THERE ON THE
STREET.
SO THAT&apos;S WHY I MOVED TO REMOVE
FURTHER DISCUSSION OF THE
AMENDMENT TO THE AMENDMENT
ROLL-CALL VOTE PLEASE START
WITH COUNCILOR BRITISH
VIEWS ON
THE AMENDMENT TO THE AMENDMENT
THE REMOVAL OF THE SECOND
CLAUSE COUNTERMELODIES NO
COUNCILOR GRISWOLD YES
COUNCILOR SONG NO
COUNTERPROGRAM NO BECAUSE WE&apos;RE
A DENHA NO MORE TAYLOR NO
ELSMERE ER NO CUSTOMER NELSON
NO CUSTOMER BRIGS.
NO THAT&apos;S MY AMAWI YES CUSTOMER
HAYNER YES MOTION FAILS FURTHER
DISCUSSION OF THE AMENDMENT
ROLL-CALL VOTE ON THE AMENDMENT
STARTING OFF IN BRITISH
SMARTISH.
&gt;&gt; YES AS WELL NO CASPERSON
SONG YES COUNTERPROGRAM.
YES THAT&apos;S MADINA YES.
RETAILOR YES THAT&apos;S RIGHT ER
YES COS AND NELSON YES
SWARBRICK YES CUSTOMER WE&apos;RE
AMAWI NO CUSTOMER HAYNER NO
MOTION CARRIES FURTHER
DISCUSSION THE MAIN MOTION AS
AMENDED COUNCIL MEMBER ER
THANKS I&apos;LL I&apos;LL SHARE WITH
THIS BODY AND THE COMMUNITY AN
EXAMPLE OF WHAT IT&apos;S LIKE TO
HAVE CUSTOMERS DOWNTOWN AND
HAVE NO CHOICE BUT TO ARRIVE TO
PROVIDE THE SERVICES THAT I
PROVIDE IN A MOTOR VEHICLE MANY
MANY DAYS ALMOST EVERY DAY THAT
I AM DOWN THERE I AM WESTBOUND
ON LIBERTY WANTING TO TURN
RIGHT ON NORTH DIVISION TO HEAD
BACK TOWARD ONE A NO TURN ON
RED AT THAT INTERSECTION IT&apos;S
ALMOST IMPOSSIBLE TO MAKE THE
TURN EVEN WITH THE LIGHT NOW
BECAUSE OF THE HUGE AMOUNT
OF FOOT TRAFFIC IN THAT AREA.
NOW I&apos;VE LONG ADVOCATED FOR A
SCRAMBLE AT THAT INTERSECTION
SO THAT WE COULD OPEN UP THE
ACCESS TO LIBERTY PLAZA AND SO
ON AND GET PEOPLE WHO ARE
CROSSING THE STREET ACROSS THE
STREET SAFELY AND THAT MAYBE
THAT WILL COME IN THE FUTURE I
DON&apos;T KNOW.
BUT WHAT I SEE NOW ARE LONG
LINES OF IDLING TRAFFIC WAITING
TO MAKE THAT TURN WITH THE
LIGHT.
IMAGINE WHAT IT&apos;S GOING TO BE
LIKE WITH A NO TURN ON RED AS
AN EXAMPLE IN THAT CORNER NOW I
BELIEVE IT&apos;S ALREADY AN ADDED
BECAUSE OF THE BIKE HIGHWAY
THERE.
SO WHAT HAPPENS IS YOU SIT
THERE AND YOU REALIZE YOU HAVE
A GAP IN THE ONCOMING TRAFFIC.
IF ONLY I COULD TURN AND GET
OUT OF THIS LINE OF IDLING
TRAFFIC, IF ONLY I COULD MAKE
THIS RIGHT TURN BUT I CAN&apos;T
BECAUSE IT WOULD BE A VIOLATION
OF NO TURN ON RED LAW AND A
GREAT WHITE GUY IN THEIR BOOK
OR WHATEVER AND IT JUST DOESN&apos;T
HAPPEN.
I&apos;VE SAT THROUGH TWO THREE
LIGHT CYCLES WHERE NO ONE IS
ALLOWED TO TURN RIGHT EVEN WITH
THE LIGHT WHEN WHEN THE LIGHT
IS IN THE FAVOR OF THE FLOW
OF TRAFFIC.
SO IS THE PARALLEL FLOW
OF PEDESTRIAN TRAFFIC AND
THAT&apos;S GOING TO HAPPEN ALL OVER
THIS COMMUNITY AND TO TELL ME
THAT IT&apos;S A SAFETY ISSUE WHEN
YOU LOOK AT THE ACTUAL SAFETY
REPORT IN THE LOW OCCURRENCE
OF ACTUAL PHYSICAL INJURY
THAT&apos;S IN THAT REPORT IF YOU
READ THE REPORT THAT IT&apos;S MORE
DANGEROUS FOR ME TO TURN ON RED
WITH MY 18 FOOT LIGHT PICKUP
TRUCK THAN IT IS FOR A 40 FOOT
GILLIG BUS THAT HAS A GRAPHIC
ACROSS THE SIDE YOU&apos;VE GOT TO
CARVE OUT FOR BUSSES.
&gt;&gt; SOMETHING&apos;S NOT RIGHT WITH
THIS NO TURN ON RED.
I DON&apos;T BELIEVE IT&apos;S REALLY
NECESSARILY ABOUT PEDESTRIANS
AND CYCLISTS SAFETY AND I CAN
TELL YOU WHAT IT&apos;S GOING TO
LEAD TO IS LONG LINES OF IDLING
TRAFFIC IN DIRECT OPPOSITION TO
OUR CARBON NEUTRALITY GOALS AND
FRANKLY THE CLEAN AIR OF THIS
COMMUNITY.
AND SO I&apos;M NOT GOING TO SUPPORT
THIS.
IT&apos;S BEEN COMING A LONG TIME.
I THINK SIPSMITH FLOATED THIS
COUNCIL MEMBER
SMITH FLOATED
THIS AND I DON&apos;T EVEN KNOW IN
TWENTY SIXTEEN TWENTY SEVENTEEN
SOMETHING LIKE THAT.
AND SO HERE IT IS BEFORE NO
DOUBT IT WILL BE PASSED AND NO
DOUBT YOU WILL NOT BE THERE TO
HEAR THE CURSES OF EVERYONE WHO
WORKS AND LIVES IN THE SERVICE
INDUSTRIES AND BUSINESSES AND
RESIDENTIAL AREAS IN OUR
DOWNTOWN BECAUSE IT&apos;S GOING TO
BE A BIG PAIN AND IT&apos;S CLOG UP
TRAFFIC AND IT&apos;S WILL HAVE A
SLIGHT IF ANY EFFECT ON THE
SAFETY.
EVERYONE WHO IS PROPER DRIVER
EDUCATION KNOWS YOU LOOK BEFORE
YOU OPEN YOUR DOOR FOR
CYCLISTS.
&gt;&gt; YOU DO A DUTCH DOOR OPEN AND
YOU LOOK BEFORE YOU TURN RED
CROSS OVER.
&gt;&gt; COUNCILOR WON&apos;T DO I
SUBMITTED QUESTIONS FOR A STAFF
INTRODUCTION.
I BELIEVE MR HESS IS AVAILABLE
BUT THANK YOU FOR REMINDING ME.
MY APOLOGIES.
GOOD EVENING COUNCILOR
TRANSPORTATION MANAGER FOR THE
CITY.
I&apos;LL QUICKLY GO THROUGH THE
QUESTION COUNCIL MEMBER
GRISWOLD RAISED THE FIRST WAS
BASED ON THE TEN REPORTS THREE
WERE RIGHT TURN ON RED AND
THREE WERE RIGHT TURN ON GREEN.
I WASN&apos;T ABLE TO CHECK THE EUDY
TODAY BUT WE&apos;LL TAKE THAT AS
FACT FOR PURPOSES OF THE
REMAINING RESPONSIBLE FOR THE
FIRST QUESTION WAS COULD STAFF
IDENTIFY THE NUMBER OF CRASHES
THAT WE EXPECT TO PREVENT BY
PROHIBITING RIGHT TURN ON RED
AND THE NUMBER OF ADDITIONAL
CRASHES RESULTING FROM MORE
DRIVERS WAITING AND THEN
TURNING WHEN THEY HAVE THE
GREEN LIGHT AND A PEDESTRIAN
POTENTIALLY HAVE THE WRONG
SIGNAL.
&gt;&gt; SO THIS IS KIND OF DIFFICULT
BECAUSE REALLY WE HAVE TO LOOK
AT THE HISTORIC TRENDS IN ORDER
TO KIND OF SPECULATE WHAT THE
FUTURE IMPACT WOULD BE.
AND SO REALLY THIS GETS BACK TO
WHAT&apos;S IDENTIFIED IN THE
SUPPLEMENTAL MEMO THAT THE
THREE CRASHES THAT WERE
IDENTIFIED, A FIVE YEAR PERIOD
WOULD HAVE BEEN THE ONE THAT
WERE TURNED ON RED THAT WOULD
HAVE BEEN EXPECTED TO BE
PREVENTED BY PROHIBITING THE
RIGHT TURN ON RED.
HOWEVER, THIS DOES NOT
NECESSARILY ADDRESS THE CRASHES
INVOLVING A VEHICLE WHICH HAS
THE GREEN LIGHT.
&gt;&gt; THE NEXT QUESTION WAS SAFETY
FOR RIGHT TURN ON GREEN IS
IMPROVED WITH A LEADING ROLE
FOR PEDESTRIANS.
DO ALL SIGNALS IN THE
DESIGNATED AREA HAVE LEADING
INTERVAL FOR PEDESTRIANS?
IF NOT, WHAT IS THE
IMPLEMENTATION SCHEDULE?
YES, ALL INTERSECTIONS THAT ARE
CITY CONTROLLED OUTBREEDING
PEDESTRIAN INTERVALS CITYWIDE
WE IMPLEMENTED THAT DURING THE
PANDEMIC.
THE ONE NOTE HERE IS THAT NOT
CONTROLLED INTERSECTIONS ON THE
TRUNK LINE.
SO IN THIS AREA PARTICULAR HERE
ON MANY OF THOSE INTERSECTIONS
DO NOT OR MOST OF THOSE
INTERSECTIONS DO NOT HAVE
WEETING PEDESTRIAN INTERVALS
BECAUSE THAT HALL IS UP TO THE
STATES TO MAKE SOME NEARBY
COMMUNITIES USE AN OVERHEAD
TURN ON RIGHT SIGN WHEN THE
MESSAGE IS ONLY VISIBLE WHEN IT
IS ELIMINATED ALLOWING
ENFORCEMENT DURING SPECIFIC
PERIODS OF THE DAY HAVE WE
CONSIDERED THIS OPTION?
I HAVE NOT HEARD CONSIDERATION
OF THAT BUT GIVEN THE HIGH
PEDESTRIAN ACTIVITY THROUGHOUT
THE COURSE OF THE DAY I DON&apos;T
KNOW IF A TIME RESTRICTION HAS
APPLICABILITY IN THE DOWNTOWN
AREA AND IN THE LAST HOUR OR
ANOTHER TWO QUESTIONS LAST TWO
QUESTIONS FEDERAL HIGHWAY
ADMINISTRATION RECOMMENDS
PROHIBITING RETURN ON THE ROAD
WHEN A SUBSTANTIAL NUMBER
OF PEDESTRIANS DOES THE FEDERAL
HIGHWAY GIVE ANY NUMBERS AT
RATIOS BETWEEN VEHICLES AND
PEDESTRIANS?
I DID A SCAN THROUGH THE
LITERATURE TODAY.
I COULDN&apos;T FIND A HARD AND FAST
RULE IN TERMS OF WHAT THE
NUMBERS ARE OR THE RATIOS ARE
BETWEEN VEHICLES AND
PEDESTRIANS.
IT&apos;S MORE ABOUT THE CRASH
OCCURRENCE AND SOME OF THE
LITERATURE I CITED AND THEN THE
LAST QUESTION IS PEDESTRIAN
CRASHES ARE AT UNACCEPTABLE
LEVELS THROUGHOUT THE CITY BUT
PRIMARILY IN THE DOWNTOWN AREA
AND MAJOR ARTERIES.
IS THAT CONSIDERING ANY OTHER
ACTION TO REDUCE THE NUMBER
OF PEDESTRIAN CRASHES WHEN A
VEHICLE IS MAKING A TURN ON
GREEN?
AND YES, THAT&apos;S PART OF THE IS
IMPLEMENTATION STRATEGY.
ONE OF THE DELIVERABLES OF THAT
WAS WHAT WE ORIGINALLY CALL THE
MAJOR STREETS TRAFFIC CALMING
PROGRAM BUT HAVE SINCE KIND
OF REBRANDED IT AS A SPEED
MANAGEMENT PROGRAM.
AND SO WE&apos;RE CURRENTLY WORKING
ON THAT WITH THE CONSULTANT.
WE HOPE TO GET THAT PUBLICLY
STARTING LATER THIS MONTH, NEXT
MONTH AND THAT MIGHT AFFORD US
SOME OPPORTUNITIES TO REDUCE
SPEED WHICH WOULD THEN IMPROVE
SAFETY OF ALL USERS OF THE
CORRIDOR INCLUDING PEDESTRIANS,
CYCLISTS AND MOTORISTS.
AND SO THAT MAY INCLUDE, YOU
KNOW, VERTICAL DEVICES THAT
PEOPLE DRIVE OVER.
BUT WE&apos;RE CURRENTLY LOOKING AT
ALL THE OPTIONS AND WHAT&apos;S
ACCEPTABLE TO OUR EMERGENCY
RESPONDERS TRANSIT AND THE
COMMUNITY WRIT LARGE.
OK, THANK YOU.
AND IF YOU&apos;D LIKE ME TO SEND
YOU THAT THE 610 REPORT THAT I
LOOKED AT, I CAN I CAN SEND
THEM TO YOU AS AN ATTACHMENT SO
YOU DON&apos;T HAVE TO LOOK THEM UP.
I&apos;VE GOT THE PDF COUNSELOR
NELSON I THE ONE ADDITION TO
THIS RESOLUTION THAT WAS ON OUR
AGENDA WAS ABOUT COORDINATION,
THE &apos;88 AND MR. HOUSE, I THINK
YOU SERVE ON THAT BOARD.
&gt;&gt; AREN&apos;T YOU LIKE THE CITY&apos;S
REP FOR THAT BOARD?
NO.
WELL, NO WONDER.
&gt;&gt; OK, WELL, I MEAN I GOT I&apos;M
LOOKING AT A SYSTEMS MAP FOR A
TIER RIGHT NOW AND I GUESS I&apos;M
I&apos;M CURIOUS IF IF YOU HAVE ANY
THOUGHTS OFF THE TOP OF YOUR
HEAD ABOUT WHERE WHERE THAT
PART OF THIS RESOLUTION MIGHT
HAVE AN IMPACT IN TERMS
OF EXEMPTIONS IN OUR
PRELIMINARY DISCUSSIONS WITH
THE ACA, THEY INDICATED THREE
INTERSECTIONS WHERE THIS
EXCEPTION FOR TRANSIT MIGHT
STAND TO BENEFIT OUR
OPERATIONS.
I CAN LOOK THOSE UP.
I MIGHT NEED A MOMENT TO LOOK
AT THE EMAIL BUT I REMEMBER
PORT HURON WAS ONE BECAUSE ALL
THE BUSSES THAT ARE COMING OUT
OF THE LAKE THAT ARE HEADED
NORTH MAKE THAT TURN FROM
FOURTH ONTO HURON.
SO I THINK THAT WAS ONE OF THE
LOCATIONS AND I CAN&apos;T RECALL
THE OTHER TOP OF MY HEAD BUT I
CAN LOOK WELL I&apos;M SURE.
&gt;&gt; BUT SHARON IS NOT CONTROLLED
BY THE CITY IS IT?
&gt;&gt; ANYWAY, A FOURTH IS NO
CORRECT BUT THE FOURTH STREET
MOVEMENT IS CONTROLLED BY THE
CITY.
&gt;&gt; SO WHILE THE RIGHT TURN
PROGRESSION OF THE TRUNK LINE
IT COULD APPLY THE FOURTH.
&gt;&gt; OK, ALL RIGHT.
&gt;&gt; WELL THANK YOU FOR THAT.
I APPRECIATE THAT COUNCILOR
HAYNER.
&gt;&gt; THANK YOU.
I WOULD THINK THAT MOST OF THE
EXEMPTIONS ARE DESIGNED TO CURB
THE FLOW TRAFFIC IN NOW TO THE
DOWNTOWN HUB THERE WE DO WE DO
YOU KNOW FOR AT WE DO VARIABLE
RIGHT TURN ON RED SIGNAGE.
I KNOW IT COSTS MORE TO HAVE
THAT TYPE OF SIGN BUT ON EAST
RIVER DRIVE AT HERE IN PARKWAY
FOR EXAMPLE BY THE HERE AND
HILLS GOLF COURSE WE HAVE A
VARIABLE NO TURN ON RED THAT&apos;S
PART OF THE SIGNAL GROUP THAT&apos;S
OVERHEAD.
THEY&apos;RE I ASSUME THAT&apos;S FOR THE
SAFETY OF THE GOLF COURSE
PEDESTRIAN FLOW.
SO IT&apos;S NOT IT UNKNOWN
TECHNOLOGY AND I CERTAINLY
THINK THAT AFTER A CERTAIN HOUR
IT WOULD BE APPROPRIATE TO
WAIVE THAT RESTRICTION.
YOU KNOW, WHO&apos;S WHO&apos;S GOING TO
SIT AT A AT A CORNER AT 4:00 IN
THE MORNING IDLING IN TRAFFIC
LIKE WE DO AT THE BOTTOM
OF SWIFT NOW IF I TRAIL WITH
THE NO TURN ON RED, WHO&apos;S GOING
TO DO THAT?
YOU KNOW, SO WE&apos;RE CREATING
LAWLESSNESS IN A SENSE BECAUSE
I THINK THIS COULD BE APPLIED
IN A WAY THAT IS NOT A BLANKET
MANNER LIKE WE&apos;RE DOING HERE.
I LIKE THE IDEA OF VARIABLE NO
TURN ON RED SIGNAGE AND I THINK
IT&apos;S I THINK IT&apos;S APPROPRIATE
AND I THINK IT FITS THE THE
GOALS OF THIS WHATEVER THOSE
MAY BE RED LINE.
YEAH.
I MEAN I THINK THIS WILL BE
PASSED TONIGHT.
IT&apos;S GOT SOME SOME FALSE HOPE
IN INNER UM I DON&apos;T THINK IT&apos;S
GOING TO LEAD TO NECESSARILY
WHAT THE SPONSORS WOULD HOPE IT
LEADS TO.
UM, WE DO HAVE INCREASED
CONGESTION IN DOWNTOWN.
IT&apos;S IT&apos;S PRETTY BAD.
IT&apos;S GETTING WORSE BUT I GUESS
THAT&apos;S MAYBE THE POINT IS TO
MAKE IT SO DIFFICULT FOR PEOPLE
TO GIVE UP ON IT ALTOGETHER.
UM, DON&apos;T KNOW IF YOU DO A FEW
TOTALISTIC BUT IT IS THERE IS
IF YOU DO HIRE A CONTRACTOR TO
COME AND WORK IN YOUR PLACE
DOWNTOWN IT&apos;S GOING TO COST YOU
MORE.
THERE IS NO QUESTION YOU TELL
ANY CONTRACTOR YOUR ADDRESS
ONCE THEY HEAR ANN ARBOR IT
COST MORE.
THERE IS AN ANN ARBOR TAX THAT
CONTRACTORS PUT ON BUSINESS
OWNERS AND PROPERTY OWNERS AND
HOMEOWNERS.
UM, SO I&apos;M NOT SAYING THIS IS
THIS BY ITSELF IS GOING TO MAKE
A BIG IMPACT BUT YOU KNOW, UH,
OVER TIME UH, THE CITY HAS
ADOPTED POLICIES THAT ARE
COUNTERING TO LIVE TO ITS
GOALS.
UM, THIS MAY BE ANOTHER ONE UM
,I THINK IT&apos;S GOING TO CAUSE
PEOPLE TO TRY TO TURN ON GREEN
UH AT TIMES WHERE IT&apos;S IN
CONFLICT WITH DEATH SYRIANS WHO
ARE MOVING IN THE SAME
DIRECTION BECAUSE LIKE WHAT YOU
JUST SAID BECAUSE REMEMBER
HAYNER THEY MAYBE HAVE BEEN
WAITING HERE FOR THREE, FOUR OR
FIVE MINUTES AND FRUSTRATED AND
GOING TO TAKE SOME CHANCES THAT
ARE NOT GOING TO BE POSITIVE.
AND SO I HOPE THAT
AFTER THIS
PASSES THAT THERE ARE OTHER
INSTRUMENTS AND TECHNOLOGIES
THAT ARE DEPLOYED THAT IMPROVE
SAFETY.
UH, I THINK THIS MIGHT BE A
STEP IN THE RIGHT DIRECTION.
BUT IF THIS IS IF NOTHING ELSE
IS FOLLOWED UP, THIS IS GOING
TO BE COUNTERPRODUCTIVE TO OUR
TWO ZERO GOALS GOING TO BE
COUNTERPRODUCTIVE TO QUALITY
OF LIVING STANDARDS.
IT&apos;S GOING TO BE
COUNTERPRODUCTIVE TO
AFFORDABILITY, MIGHT BE EVEN
COUNTERPRODUCTIVE TO SAFETY.
SO THOSE ARE REAL THINGS.
HUMANS ARE HUMANS.
UM, THEY&apos;RE GOING TO ACT IN
WAYS THAT ARE QUITE FRANKLY
MYOPIC.
&gt;&gt; THANK YOU.
&gt;&gt; COUNCIL MEMBER BRAKE&apos;S
THANKS.
I DON&apos;T THINK THERE&apos;S A LOT
OF WORRIES ABOUT HOW THIS MIGHT
PLAY OUT.
IT&apos;S WHY I&apos;VE TRIED TO RELY ON
SORT OF THE EXPERTIZE ON THIS
SO FEDERAL HIGHWAY
ADMINISTRATION HAS SAID THAT
THIS IS A PROVEN COUNTERMEASURE
FOR IMPROVING PEDESTRIAN
SAFETY.
SO I&apos;VE LEANED ON ON ON THAT
FACT IN TERMS OF AFFORDABILITY
.
WE WE WE GOT AN EQUITY ANALYSIS
ON THAT PIECE BUT WE KNOW THAT
TRANSPORTATION IS THE SECOND
BIGGEST COST IN HOUSEHOLDS SO
THIS IS SOMETHING CERTAINLY
THAT IMPROVING THE PEDESTRIAN
EXPERIENCE IS HELPFUL IN THAT
IT&apos;S IMPORTANT TO NOTE THAT
WHEN WE TALK ABOUT IMPROVING
THE PEDESTRIAN EXPERIENCE IN
ANN ARBOR THAT&apos;S VERY RELEVANT.
WE&apos;RE LUCKY WE HAVE A VERY
VIBRANT DOWNTOWN AND WE HAVE A
VERY HARD WALK MODE SHARE IN
THE CITY OF ANN, 17 PERCENT
OF FOLKS IN ANN ARBOR WALK TO
WORK AN ADDITIONAL NINE POINT
FOUR PERCENT COMMUTE BY
TRANSIT.
NOW NATIONALLY THE AVERAGE IS
TWO POINT SEVEN PERCENT.
SO WHEN WE TALK ABOUT IMPROVING
THAT EXPERIENCE, IMPROVING THAT
COMFORT LEVEL, THAT&apos;S REALLY
IMPORTANT BECAUSE WE HAVE A LOT
OF FOLKS OUT THERE WALKING AND
WE HAVE CRASHES.
WE ALSO HAVE A LOT OF NEAR
MISSES AND I THINK EVERYBODY AT
THIS TABLE HAS PROBABLY HEARD
ABOUT A NUMBER OF NEAR MISSES
DOWNTOWN AND THAT&apos;S A LOT
OF WHAT THIS RESOLUTION IS
AIMING TO IMPROVE IS THAT THAT
OH MY GOSH, I ALMOST GOT HIT
AND THAT&apos;S NOT THAT&apos;S NOT THE
FEELING AND THAT&apos;S NOT THE
EXPERIENCE THAT WE&apos;RE GOING FOR
HERE.
&gt;&gt; WE HAVE SOME OUR OUR
SUSTAINABILITY GOALS ARE
TRANSPORTATION GOALS ALL HINGE
ON GETTING FOLKS TO CONSIDER
ALTERNATIVE MODES
OF TRANSPORTATION.
AND SO, YOU KNOW, THAT&apos;S WHY
OUR OFFICE OF SUSTAINABILITY
ALSO WEIGHED IN AND SAID THAT
THEY BELIEVED THAT THIS WAS A
POSITIVE IN TERMS OF THE IMPACT
ON SUSTAINABILITY DISCUSSION
BECAUSE WE WERE SO
GOING BACK
TO THE MEMO WE THE CONVERSATION
IS FOCUSED ON TRAFFIC AND
MOVING TRAFFIC.
FOR ME THIS THIS REALLY SPEAKS
TO THE DRIVER SAFETY TOO.
SO WHEN STAFFORD PULLED
TOGETHER THIS MEMO THEY HAD
NOTED THAT THERE WERE TWENTY
EIGHT FAILURE TO YIELD ON
RETURN CRASHES AT THESE AT
THESE INTERSECTIONS 17 OF WHICH
INVOLVED ONLY MOTOR VEHICLES
SIX INVOLVED PEDESTRIANS, FIVE
INVOLVED BY BICYCLISTS.
AND LATER ON WHEN WE TALK ABOUT
ELDERLY DRIVERS, THE DANGERS
AND THE NUMBER OF CRASHES
INVOLVING NOT ONLY THE DRIVERS
YOU KNOW I THINK OF THE PEOPLE
IN MY NEIGHBORHOOD WHO WHO
STRUGGLE WITH MAKING SURE THEIR
PARENTS ARE DRIVING SAFELY
ELDERLY PARENTS ARE DRIVING
SAFELY.
&gt;&gt; SO TURNING RIGHT ON RIGHT IS
NOT A RIGHT.
WE EXERCISE YIELDING ALL THE
TIME.
SO YOU KNOW, I I WOULD THINK
THAT TO YIELD OR NOT TO YIELD
IS IS NOT REALLY A QUESTION.
IT&apos;S YIELD WE PRACTICES ALL THE
TIME IN INTERSECTIONS WHEN WE
ENCOUNTER PEDESTRIANS TO AFFIRM
THIS SHOULD NOT BE A DIFFICULT
THING.
I THINK ARBOR IS CAPABLE ITS
RESIDENTS ARE CAPABLE KNOWING
THAT THIS CRASH DATA IS
AVAILABLE IF YOU CONSIDER
OF THEIR NEIGHBORS AND THEIR
COLLEAGUES WHO WERE JUST TRYING
TO GET TO WORK TO SCHOOL OR TO
TO SHOP OR TO A LIBRARY,
WHATEVER IT IS WITHOUT HAVING
TO WORRY ABOUT CRASHING FURTHER
DISCUSSION ROLL CALL VOTE
PLEASE.
&gt;&gt; STARTING WITH COUNCILMAN
BRITISH
HOUSE DISH.
YES, COUNCILOR GRISWOLD NO WAS
WRONG.
YES COUNTERPROGRAM YES.
DENHA YES.
RETAILOR YES ELSMORE ER YES
ELSEWHERE AND ALSO YES
COUNCILOR BRIGGS YES.
COUNCILOR AMAWI YES ELSMERE
HAYNER NO MOSHING KARITH DO YOU
SEE TWO RESOLUTION REALLY
RECOGNIZED IN THE MIDDLE SCHOOL
PARENT TEACHER ORGANIZATION INC
AS A CIVIC NONPROFIT
ORGANIZATION OPERATING ANN
ARBOR FOR THE PURPOSE
OF OBTAINING A CHARITABLE
GAMING LICENSE MOVED BY
COUNTERPROGRAM SECOND DENHA
DISCUSSION ON FAVOR POSED IT IS
APPROVED DC THREE RESOLUTION TO
ORDER LECTION APPROVED CHARTER
AMENDMENT OF THE ANN ARBOR CITY
CHARTER SECTIONS TO ESTABLISH
NONPARTIZAN NOMINATION AND
ELECTION FOR THE OFFICES
OF MAYOR AND COUNCIL TO
DETERMINE BALLOT LANGUAGE FOR
THIS AMENDMENT MOVED BY
GRISWOLD SECONDED BY COUNCILMAN
NELSON DISCUSSION PLEASE OF DC
THREE COUNCILMAN GRISWOLD FIRST
THIS RESOLUTION SIMPLY PLACES
THE LANGUAGE ON THE BALLOT TO
LET THE VOTERS DECIDE.
NUMBER TWO, IT WILL BRING ANN
ARBOR INTO ALIGNMENT WITH THE
VAST MAJORITY OF OTHER CITIES
IN THE STATE AND BETTER PREPARE
US FOR WHEN THE STATE STARTS
MANDATING SOME CHANGES.
ONE CHANGE THAT&apos;S BEING
CONSIDERED RIGHT NOW IS MOVING
THE PRIMARY DATE TO THE SPRING.
ANOTHER THING THAT WON&apos;T BE
MANDATED BY THE STATE BUT WILL
BE ALLOWED IS WHEN WE&apos;RE
ALLOWED TO HAVE RANKED CHOICE
VOTING AND ALSO IMPORTANT IS
THAT THE STUDENTS WILL BE HERE
AND WILL BE ABLE TO PARTICIPATE
IN THE NOVEMBER ELECTIONS
COUNCIL.
MARIAH.
OH, I&apos;M SORRY.
OK, THANK YOU.
&gt;&gt; SO CHAMPIONS OF NONPARTISAN
MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS LIKE TO SAY
THERE IS NO DEMOCRATIC OR
REPUBLICAN WAY TO FILL A
POTHOLE AND WHILE THAT&apos;S A
CATCHY SLOGAN, IT&apos;S UTTERLY
FALSE.
&gt;&gt; THE DEMOCRATIC WAY TO FILL A
POTHOLE IS TO EMPLOY FULL TIME
UNIONIZED WORKERS WHO ARE PAID
PREVAILING WAGES WITH HEALTH
CARE AND BENEFITS.
THE REPUBLICAN WAY IS TO
OUTSOURCE THE JOB TO THE LOWEST
BIDDER WHO USUALLY PAYS MINIMUM
WAGE WITH NO BENEFITS.
THESE DIFFERENCES AREN&apos;T
LIMITED TO BASIC SERVICES.
DEMOCRATS AND REPUBLICANS HAVE
VASTLY DIFFERENT VALUES AND
POLICY POSITIONS ON A RANGE
OF MUNICIPAL ISSUES INCLUDING
AFFORDABLE HOUSING, CLIMATE
ACTION POLICING DGI INITIATIVES
MULTI TRANSIT, LAND USE AND
ZONING AND MORE.
&gt;&gt; FOR EXAMPLE, YOU KNOW AS A
DEMOCRAT I&apos;M REALLY EXCITED
THAT PRESIDENT BIDEN HAS
PROPOSED A TEN BILLION DOLLAR
STATE AND LOCAL GRANT PROGRAM
TO INCENTIVIZE LOCAL
MUNICIPALITIES TO ELIMINATE
EXCLUSIONARY ZONING.
TRUMP, ON THE OTHER HAND,
STRONGLY OPPOSES ELIMINATING OR
ELIMINATING EXCLUSIONARY ZONING
AND OFTEN USES RACIST DOG
WHISTLES AND FEAR TACTICS TO
STIR UP THE OPPOSITION.
&gt;&gt; SO IT&apos;S CLEAR THAT THERE ARE
IMPORTANT PARTIZAN DIVISIONS
AND CITY MATTERS.
&gt;&gt; THEREFORE PARTY LABELS
PROVIDE CRUCIAL PIECE
OF INFORMATION TO VOTERS
SIGNALING A CANDIDATE&apos;S VALUES
AND POLICY POSITIONS.
WHY ON EARTH WOULD WE WANT TO
TAKE THAT INFORMATION AWAY FROM
VOTERS?
&gt;&gt; SOME SUGGEST IT BECAUSE
EVERYONE RUNS AS A DEMOCRAT
HERE THE INFORMATION IS
IRRELEVANT WHILE DEMOCRATS HAVE
DOMINATED ANAPRA POLITICS IN
RECENT HISTORY THAT WASN&apos;T
ALWAYS THE CASE AND WE CAN&apos;T
SIMPLY ASSUME THAT THE TIDES
WOULD NEVER TURN AGAIN EVEN IF
RIGHT NOW IT SEEMS UNLIKELY
WHEN WE CONSIDER CHARTER
CHANGES WE MUST THINK OF A
RANGE OF POSSIBLE SITUATIONS
NOT JUST THE ONE FACING US AT
THIS EXACT MOMENT IN TIME.
I DON&apos;T WANT TO DEPRIVE FUTURE
VOTERS OF IMPORTANT INFORMATION
SUCH AS PARTY AFFILIATION IN A
COMPETITIVE TWO PARTY RACE
EARLIER TODAY I CAME ACROSS A A
GREAT GRAPHIC AND YOU CAN
GOOGLE IT FROM A STUDY AT
BRIGHAM BRIGHAM YOUNG
UNIVERSITY.
IT&apos;S TITLED OH NO I&apos;VE ELECTED
A REPUBLICAN AND IT PRESENTS
THE STUDY&apos;S CONCLUSION USING
DATA FROM OVER FIFTEEN THOUSAND
THREE HUNDRED U.S. CITIES THEY
FOUND IT NONPARTISAN ELECTIONS
ALLOW MINORITY PARTY CANDIDATES
TO SNEAK INTO OFFICE IN CITIES
WHERE THEIR PARTY IS UNPOPULAR
AS TO TURNOUT EVEN THERE THERE
ARE CONCERNS STUDIES HAVE SHOWN
THAT NONPARTISANSHIP DEPRESSES
TURNOUT BECAUSE MANY VOTERS
SIMPLY SKIP THE NONPARTIZAN
SECTION THERE ARE BETTER WAYS
TO INCREASE VOTER PARTICIPATION
MOVING COUNCIL RACES TO EVEN
YEARS AND NO REASON ABSENTEE
VOTING HAVE BOTH PROVIDED A BIG
BOOST AND WE PASSED A CHARTER
AMENDMENT RECENTLY FOR RANK
CHOICE VOTING WITH PARTY
LABELS.
SO WE ARE READY IF AND WHEN
THAT IS EVER ALLOWED THAT WILL
ULTIMATELY BE THE BEST AVENUE
FOR INCREASING PARTICIPATION
WITHOUT CAUSING COLLATERAL
DAMAGE TO THE PROCESS AS THIS
PROPOSAL WOULD COUNCIL MEMBER
DENHA.
THANK YOU MAYOR.
IN ADDITION TO EVERYTHING THAT
COMES FROM OUR SIDE, I WILL
ALSO BE OPPOSING THIS
RESOLUTION TONIGHT.
I STRONGLY ENCOURAGE MY
COLLEAGUES TO DO THE SAME.
THERE IS NOTHING CURRENTLY
PREVENTING ANN ARBOR FROM
HAVING ROBUST LOCAL GENERAL
ELECTIONS.
OUR MAYOR IS IN THE MIDST
OF HIS OWN GENERAL ELECTION
CAMPAIGN.
EACH OF HIS THREE COUNTY
COMMISSIONERS HAVE A GENERAL
ELECTION OPPONENTS.
ALL SIX OF THE STATE
LEGISLATIVE DISTRICTS IN ANN
ARBOR HAVE MULTIPLE CANDIDATES
RUNNING IN NOVEMBER.
THE ONLY THING THAT HAS HAS
RECENTLY
PREVENTED THE CITY
FROM HAVING A COMPETITIVE
GENERAL ELECTION IS A LACK
OF CREDIBLE REPUBLICAN
INDEPENDENT OR THIRD PARTY
CANDIDATES WILLING TO STEP
FORWARD AND MAKE THE CASE TO
THE ELECTORATE ABOUT WHY THEY
SHOULD SHIFT AWAY FROM
DEMOCRATIC CANDIDATES.
SO WHILE THIS PROPOSAL WOULD
NOT ENABLE GENERAL ELECTIONS,
WHAT IT WOULD ACCOMPLISH IS TO
REDUCE THE INFLUENCE THAT
DEMOCRATIC VOTERS HAVE IN THOSE
ELECTIONS.
IT ALMOST GUARANTEES THAT NO
ELECTIONS WILL BECOME MORE
EXPENSIVE BY EXTENDING MANY
CAMPAIGNS BY AN ADDITIONAL
THREE MONTHS.
IT REDUCES THE AMOUNT
OF INFORMATION AVAILABLE TO
VOTERS ON THE BALLOT.
IT WOULD SHIFT POWER AWAY FROM
VOTERS TO SELECT THEIR PARTY&apos;S
NOMINEES AND INSTEAD ABOUT
EMPOWER A HANDFUL OF LOCAL
PARTY INSIDERS TO HAND SELECTED
NOMINEES THROUGH THEIR MORE
EXCLUSIVE ENDORSEMENT PROCESSES
.
BUT MOST DANGEROUSLY IT WOULD
SEVERELY REDUCE VOTER
PARTICIPATION IN OUR LOCAL
GENERAL ELECTIONS, INCREASE THE
AMOUNT OF TIME IT TAKES TO VOTE
AND MAKE IT HARDER FOR VOTERS
TO SELECT THEIR PREFERRED
CANDIDATES SPECIFICALLY, THIS
PROPOSAL HAS THE POTENTIAL TO
DISENFRANCHIZE UP TO TENS
OF THOUSANDS OF CURRENT VOTERS
IN EVERY LOCAL ELECTION WITH
MICHIGAN&apos;S HIGHLY POPULAR
STRAIGHT TICKET VOTING OPTION,
APPROXIMATELY 50 PERCENT
OF VOTERS CAST STRAIGHT TICKET
BALLOTS IN EVERY ELECTION CYCLE
IN TWENTY TWENTY FIFTY FIVE
PERCENT OF ELIGIBLE VOTERS OR
JUST UNDER ONE HUNDRED AND
TWENTY THOUSAND PEOPLE VOTED
STRAIGHT TICKET.
SEVENTY THREE PERCENT OF THEM
WERE DEMOCRATS.
THIS PROCESS EMPOWERS VOTERS
BUT THE SINGLE STROKE OF THEIR
PEN CAST AN INFORMED A GENERAL
ELECTION BALLOT FOR EVERY
SINGLE CANDIDATE CARRYING THEIR
PREFERRED PARTY&apos;S DESIGNATION
IN A MATTER OF SECONDS ANYONE
WITH EXPERIENCE IN ELECTIONS
KNOWS THAT THERE IS A
CONSIDERABLE VOTER DROP OFF IN
NONPARTISAN RACES EITHER
BECAUSE VOTERS ARE LESS CLEAR
ABOUT WHICH CANDIDATES MAY
SHARE THEIR VALUES OR BECAUSE
OF FATIGUE AS VOTERS TRY TO
WORK THEIR WAY RACE THROUGH IT
BY RACE THROUGH THE BALLOT.
THIS WILL BE ESPECIALLY TRUE IN
AN ELECTION WHERE VOTERS WHO
ARE USED TO VOTING IN THIS WAY
ARE SUDDENLY STRIPPED OF THIS
ABILITY IN THE EVIDENCE TO
SUPPORT THIS IS CONSIDERABLE
BECAUSE OF THE NATURE OF OUR
ELECTORATE.
IT ALSO OVERWHELMINGLY IMPACTS
DEMOCRATIC VOTERS.
IN TWENTY TWENTY ALONE MORE
THAN 80 PERCENT OF VOTERS WHO
CAST THEIR BALLOTS IN EVERY
WARD PARTICIPATED IN THEIR
COUNCIL RACES.
BUT IN A CITYWIDE NONPARTISAN
JUDICIAL RACE, FEWER THAN FIFTY
FIVE PERCENT OF VOTERS WHO CAST
THEIR BALLOTS PARTICIPATED IN
THAT ELECTION.
THIS PATTERN HOLDS TRUE CYCLE
AFTER CYCLE WITH MASSIVE VOTER
DROP OFF IN NONPARTISAN
ELECTIONS ALL TYPES FINALLY
STUDENT VOTER VOTERS CAN AND
SHOULD VOTE IN NOVEMBER
ELECTIONS SHOULD THEY CHOOSE
WITH OUR CLERKS INCREASED
CAMPUS PRESENCE NEW LAWS TO
MAKE ABSENTEE VOTING EASIER AND
MORE ACCESSIBLE THAN EVER AND
STUDENT PARTICIPATION THE
TWENTY TWENTY ELECTION
SHATTERING PREVIOUS RECORDS
STUDENT VOTERS WHO WANT TO
PARTICIPATE CAN AND SHOULD
PARTICIPATE.
SO WHILE I SUPPORT MAKING
ELECTIONS MORE ACCESSIBLE TO
STUDENT VOTERS, I CANNOT
SUPPORT A PROPOSAL THAT
PURPORTS TO DO SO MAKING IT
HARDER FOR EVERYONE TO
PARTICIPATE IN THEIR LOCAL
ELECTIONS FOR THESE REASONS
ANOTHER I WILL BE VOTING NO
TONIGHT NO NELSON I&apos;M SORRY
ALCIVAR HAYNER THAN NELSON.
WELL THANKS MR. MAYOR.
THAT IS SOME WELL WE GOT SOME
FIRST RATE FEAR MONGERING ONE
ON HERE FIRST RATE IN ANN ARBOR
THE DEMOCRATIC WAY TO FILL A
POTHOLE IS INFREQUENTLY AND AT
GREAT EXPENSE.
A SIMPLE LOOK AT OUR ROADS CAN
TELL YOU THAT FIFTY THOUSAND
STUDENTS ARE EXEMPTED FROM
PARTICIPATING IN THE PRIMARY
WHICH IS ESSENTIALLY WHERE THIS
BODY IS SEATED AND A HANDFUL
OF PARTY INSIDERS AND DONORS
ALREADY DETERMINE THE OUTCOMES
OF OUR LOCAL ELECTIONS.
A CANDIDATE WHOSE POLITICAL
ASPIRATIONS CANNOT SURVIVE
OUTSIDE OF A PARTIZAN LABEL AS
A POOR CANDIDATE THE BIG D
MEANS LESS AND LESS ESPECIALLY
IF YOU LOOK AROUND THE POLICIES
THAT ARE ADOPTED BY THIS BODY
AND I&apos;M JUST GOING TO PUT IT
OUT THERE THAT I RAN THE
DEMOCRATIC PRIMARY AND I HAD AN
OPPONENT WHO RAN AS AN
INDEPENDENT AND RAN A FINE
CAMPAIGN AND WE HAD GOOD
CONVERSATIONS ABOUT IT AND I
WOULD HAVE BEEN JUST AS HAPPY
WITH OR WITHOUT THE D IN FRONT
OF MY NAME BECAUSE A SENILE 80
YEAR OLD WHITE MAN DOES NOT
REPRESENT THE SOUL OF MY
NATION.
PRESIDENT BIDEN DOES NOT
REPRESENT MY SOUL AND YOU ALL
CLING TO HIM BECAUSE HE HAS THE
LARGESSE THE FEDERAL DOLLARS
THAT YOU HOPE TRICKLE DOWN TO
THIS BODY JUST LIKE WE CLING TO
THE DEMOCRATIC LABEL BECAUSE
OF THE STATE DOLLARS AND THE
FUNDING THAT COMES WITH IT AND
THE UNION VOTES IN THE UNION
SUPPORT BUT YOU CLING TO
PARTIZAN AT YOUR OWN PERIL.
WE RISK TURNING OUR CITY AND I
FEAR IT&apos;S TOO LATE AND INDEED
OUR COUNTRY PITTING GREAT
PORTIONS OF US AGAINST EACH
OTHER ALL FOR PARTIZANSHIP IT
MAKES NO SENSE AND OF COURSE
I&apos;M GOING TO BE ASKED TO BE
ADDED AS A CO-SPONSOR OF THIS
JUST LIKE I DID THE PREVIOUS
TIMES WE BROUGHT THIS FORWARD
WHEN IT WAS VETOED BY THE
MAISONETTE VETO WAS UPHELD BY
THE SLIMMEST MAJORITY HERE ON
COUNCIL THAT HE HELD I THINK
NONPARTIZAN ELECTIONS ARE
PERFECTLY APPROPRIATE AND SO
DOES EVERY CITY EXCEPT THREE IN
THE STATE OF MICHIGAN INCLUDING
ANN ARBOR.
&gt;&gt; WHAT DO THEY ALL KNOW THAT
WE DON&apos;T KNOW OR IS IT THE
OTHER WAY AROUND WE&apos;RE SO
ARROGANT HERE IN THIS COMMUNITY
THAT WE THINK IT&apos;S THE OTHER
WAY AROUND THAT WE&apos;RE LEADING
SOME KIND OF CAUSE.
BUT WHAT WE REALLY ARE CLINGING
TO PARTIZAN LABELS AND
DIVISIVENESS AND IF AND
DIVISIVENESS AND IF THIS WOULD
HAVE ANYTHING TO DO WITH MAKING
IT GO AWAY, I WOULD SUPPORT IT
BECAUSE THE PEOPLE I HEAR FROM
ARE TIRED OF IT.
SO I&apos;M GOING TO SUPPORT THIS.
&gt;&gt; OF COURSE.
THANK YOU COUNTERPROGRAM.
I&apos;M SORRY COUNCILMAN.
I YOU KNOW, I I WASN&apos;T SURE THE
PURPOSE OF PUTTING THIS ON THE
AGENDA BUT I WANT TO I WANT TO
THANK COUNCIL MEMBER AS WELL
FOR URGING IT BECAUSE I&apos;VE I&apos;VE
BEEN HIGHLY ENTERTAINED TO
LISTEN TO SOME OF THE TALKING
POINTS THAT WE&apos;VE HAD TONIGHT.
&gt;&gt; WE HAD WE HAD A PUBLIC
SPEAKER DESCRIBE HOW
NONPARTISAN ELECTIONS WERE
GOING TO FAVOR CANDIDATES WITH
MEANS AND THAT SAME PUBLIC
SPEAKER COLLECTED THIRTY THREE
THOUSAND DOLLARS FROM BANK
BUSTING CAMPAIGNS THIS SUMMER.
I THINK WE&apos;RE SUPPOSED TO BE
ALARMED THAT NOT NOVEMBER
NONPARTISAN ELECTIONS ONLY HAVE
FIFTY FIVE PERCENT
PARTICIPATION AND YET OUR
PRIMARIES IN AUGUST HAD TWENTY
FIVE PERCENT PARTICIPATION.
UM I I&apos;M GOING TO SUPPORT THIS
PEOPLE WHO UNDERSTAND HOW
POLITICS ARE ACTUALLY HAPPENING
IN THIS TOWN SUPPORT THIS AND
UNDERSTAND THAT THE REAL
MEANING OF THE DEAL I HAVE
LEARNED FOR YEARS THAT I&apos;VE
BEEN ON COUNCIL CHALLENGING
PROPERTY INTERESTS HOW LITTLE
REAL PROGRESSIVE MINDEDNESS IS
HAPPENING HERE.
YOU CAN&apos;T YOU CAN&apos;T PUSH FOR
PUBLIC INVESTMENT IN A
PEDESTRIAN PATH.
YOU CAN&apos;T PUSH BACK ON THE
LANDLORDS THAT ARE DEPLETING
OUR HOUSING SUPPLY.
WE HAVE TO CRAFT EXCEPTIONS FOR
THE INVESTORS WHO I MEAN I WE
KNOW HOW EVERYBODY IS GOING TO
VOTE.
I MEAN I APPRECIATE THAT PEOPLE
WROTE SPEECHES AND ARE REALLY
PROUD OF THEMSELVES BUT THE
IDEA THAT THIS IS THANK YOU
THANK YOU CATHY FOR PUTTING
THIS ON THE AGENDA AND THANK
FOR LETTING ME COSPONSORED
CALCIUM REDISH
THIS IS A I
THINK VERY INTERESTING
DISCUSSION.
SO THE FIGURE CITING DROP OFF
IN NONPARTISAN JUDICIAL
ELECTIONS ARE REAL.
THEY&apos;RE NOT FEAR MONGERING AND
MY COLLEAGUES AT THE UNIVERSITY
ARE AMONG THE MANY THINGS THAT
THEY ARE PIONEERS IN STUDYING.
IT IS HOW VOTERS WILL
PREFERENCES, HOW THEY IDENTIFY
WHERE THEY&apos;RE GOING TO PLACE
THEIR VOTE AND MANY VOTERS RELY
ON CUES RATHER THAN FIRST HAND
INFORMATION TO DECIDE THEIR
VOTES AND PARTY IDEA IS A IS
THE PREDOMINANT Q SO YOU CAN
TAKE PARTY ID AWAY AS IS THE
CASE IN OTHER CITIES IN
MICHIGAN AS IS THE CASE IN
CHICAGO, ILLINOIS WITH WHICH
I&apos;M FAMILIAR AND WHAT PEOPLE
WILL DO IS THEY WILL FIND
PROXIES FOR PARTY ID AND ONE
OF THE MOST POWERFUL PROXIES
FOR PARTY ID IS NAME
RECOGNITION.
SO NONPARTIZAN ELECTIONS
DEMONSTRABLY FAVOR INCUMBENT
AND ONE OF THE WAYS IN WHICH I
MEAN I KNOW THAT PROPONENTS
OF THIS REFORM WOULD LIKE TO
SEE OUR ELECTORAL SYSTEM BE
MORE COMPETITIVE, COMPETITIVE
COMPETITIVENESS IS MEASURED IN
SEVERAL WAYS.
ONE WOULD BE INTERPRETED
COMPETITION.
&gt;&gt; WE DON&apos;T HAVE THAT NOW.
WE DID WE COULD AGAIN AS
COUNCIL MEMBER IGHER SUGGESTED.
BUT ANOTHER WAY THAT
COMPETITIVENESS IS MEASURED IS
WHETHER YOU CAN WHETHER
CHALLENGERS PREVAIL AGAINST
INCUMBENTS.
WE&apos;VE SEEN THAT ANN ARBOR IS
ROBUST BY THAT MEASURE IN
TWENTY EIGHTEEN IN TWENTY
TWENTY AND IN TWENTY TWENTY TWO
THERE WAS THERE WERE ROBUST
CHALLENGES TO INCUMBENTS.
SO I THINK THAT THERE ARE YOU
KNOW IT IS IT IS ALWAYS
IMPOSSIBLE TO TO PROJECT WHAT
YOU&apos;RE WHAT EFFECT YOUR REFORMS
ARE GOING TO HAVE.
I THINK THERE ARE GOOD
ARGUMENTS FOR PRESERVING PARTY
ID WHERE WE HAVE IT.
COUNCILMAN, THANK YOU.
&gt;&gt; UM, I HAVE BEEN REALLY
FASCINATED WITH SOME OF THE
LOCAL NONPARTISAN ELECTIONS
THAT ARE COMING UP ON THE
BALLOT THIS NOVEMBER BECAUSE I
HEAR FROM A LOT OF RESIDENTS
AND VOTERS THAT THEY&apos;RE
INCREDIBLY CONFUSED.
&gt;&gt; I THINK IF YOU LOOK AT THE
SCHOOL BOARD ELECTION FOR
EXAMPLE, WHERE WE HAVE 13
CANDIDATES AND PEOPLE ARE
LOOKING AT WEBSITES TO SEE IF
THEY SELF IDENTIFY AND WHAT
KINDS OF CUES ARE THEY PICKING
UP ON.
AND ONE OF THE THINGS THAT THAT
VOTERS MAY LOOK TO INSTEAD ARE
ENDORSEMENTS FROM PARTIES AND
THAT&apos;S IF WE WANT TO TALK ABOUT
AN INSIDER PROCESS YOU HAVE TO
KNOW TO ASK FOR IT.
OFTEN THOSE VOTES COME DOWN TO
WHO RALLIED.
THEY&apos;RE THE BEST YOU KNOW, THE
HIGHEST NUMBER OF SUPPORTERS TO
COME TO A MEETING WHO WERE
MEMBERS OF THE MICHIGAN
DEMOCRATIC PARTY AND KNEW TO
COME AND WE&apos;RE ABLE AND
PRIVILEGED TO BE ABLE TO COME
TO THAT MEETING.
&gt;&gt; SO TO ME THAT&apos;S A MUCH MORE
CONVOLUTED PROCESS AND JUST AN
EXAMPLE OF WHY I&apos;LL BE VOTING
NO FOR THIS.
I ALSO JUST WANT TO RESPOND TO
COUNCILOR WHO TO MY KNOWLEDGE
WAS ACTUALLY ELECTED BY THE
VOTERS AND SO IF ALL OF US WERE
VOTED IN AS A RESULT OF , YOU
KNOW, A FEW POLITICAL INSIDERS,
I GUESS THAT MEANS THAT YOU
WERE ALSO VOTED IN AS A RESULT
OF , YOU KNOW, THE INFLUENCE
OF A FEW POLITICAL INSIDERS.
I&apos;M SAYING THAT IT&apos;S
RIDICULOUS, OF COURSE, BUT SO
ARE LOTS OF THE CONSPIRACIES
THAT ARE THROWN OUT AT THIS
TABLE.
COUNCILOR, THANKS.
I WANTED TO ADDRESS THE
COMMENTS ABOUT OTHER CITIES
HAVING IT FIGURED OUT AND YOU
KNOW THAT WE ARE SOMEHOW AN
OUTLIER.
IT&apos;S FUNNY THAT BOULDER WAS
MENTIONED BECAUSE PROGRESSIVE
DEMOCRATS IN THAT TOWN ARE
ACTUALLY WORKING RIGHT NOW TO
CHANGE THEIR ELECTION CYCLE
FROM ODD YEARS TO EVEN JUST AS
ANN ARBOR DID A FEW YEARS AGO
AND PERHAPS THEY WILL MAKE
THEIR ELECTIONS PARTIZAN NEXT.
&gt;&gt; MEANWHILE IN NEARBY AURORA,
COLORADO POPULATION THREE
HUNDRED AND EIGHTY FIVE
THOUSAND, A DEMOCRATIC COUNCIL
MEMBER IS PROPOSING A MOVE TO
EVEN YOUR PARTIZAN ELECTIONS.
&gt;&gt; HE CALLED NONPARTIZAN RACES
QUOTE A BEAUTIFUL DREAM BUT
UNREALISTIC AND SAID CONDUCTING
PARTIZAN RACES WOULD BE MORE
HONEST WITH VOTERS.
I QUITE AGREE.
AND IN AUSTIN WHICH IS ALSO
MENTIONED IN THE RESOLUTION
THEY MOVED FROM AT LARGE
COUNCIL ELECTIONS TO GEOGRAPHIC
BASE DISTRICTS IN 2014 LIKE
WE&apos;VE LONG HAD HERE IN ANN
ARBOR.
&gt;&gt; SO CLEARLY THERE ARE OTHER
CITIES OUT THERE, BENCHMARK
CITIES EVEN THAT WE CONSIDER
THAT ARE BECOMING MORE LIKE US
RATHER THAN THE OTHER WAY
AROUND.
&gt;&gt; COUNCIL MEMBER A DENHA.
&gt;&gt; THANK YOU, MR. MAYOR.
I YOU KNOW, I&apos;M DISAPPOINTED
SOME OF THE COMMENTS TONIGHT
BECAUSE IT&apos;S THIS CONTINUED
THEME THAT WE CONTINUE TO HEAR
FROM A FEW OF MY COLLEAGUES
THAT WHENEVER FOLKS DISAGREE
WITH THEM OR VOTERS DISAGREE
WITH THEM THAT THEY ARE SOMEHOW
EITHER LACKING IN UNDERSTANDING
OR COMPLETELY MISINFORMED
RATHER THAN SIMPLY DISAGREEING
WITH SOMEONE&apos;S POSITION.
WE HEARD THAT AGAIN TONIGHT
THAT PEOPLE WHO REALLY
UNDERSTAND WOULD WOULD KNOW TO
SUPPORT THIS.
&gt;&gt; I THINK THAT THE VOTERS
OF ANN ARBOR ARE PRETTY
INFORMED.
&gt;&gt; I&apos;VE WORKED IN IN ELECTIONS
ALL OVER THE STATE.
ANN ARBOR HAS INCREDIBLY
INFORMED VOTERS AND SO I THINK
CONTINUING TO DISMISS VOTERS IS
DISAPPOINTING.
&gt;&gt; I ALSO WANT TO ADDRESS THE
FACT THAT THE SUGGESTION
TONIGHT THAT THE ATTACK ON ONE
OF OUR PUBLIC SPEAKERS WHO
REPRESENT THE LABOR
ORGANIZATION ORGANIZATIONS
REPRESENTING LOCAL WORKERS ARE
ABLE TO PARTICIPATE IN OUR
LOCAL ELECTIONS AS WELL.
THE FACT THAT ORGANIZATIONS
REPRESENTING LOCAL WORKERS
WOULD WANT TO SUPPORT
CANDIDATES IN AN ELECTION THAT
MIGHT ALSO SUPPORT LOCAL
WORKERS SHOULD NOT BE
SURPRISING TO ANYONE.
AGAIN, I THINK IT&apos;S
DISAPPOINTING WHEN WE SEE THIS
CONTINUED TREND OF PEOPLE
ATTACKING ANYONE WHO MIGHT
DISAGREE WITH THEM AS EITHER
CORRUPT OR MISINFORMED.
FINALLY, THIS NOTION THAT THE
ARGUMENT OF REDUCED GENERAL
ELECTION TURNOUT BY THE
MAGNITUDE OF THOUSANDS
OF VOTES, TENS OF THOUSANDS
VOTES IS NOT IMPORTANT BECAUSE
PRIMARY ELECTIONS HAVE
RELATIVELY LOW TURNOUT.
&gt;&gt; YOU KNOW, AGAIN, THERE IS
NOTHING STOPPING US FROM
CURRENTLY HAVING ROBUST GENERAL
ELECTIONS ASIDE FROM THE FACT
THAT CANDIDATES ARE NOT
CHOOSING TO FILE OUTSIDE OF THE
DEMOCRATIC PARTY.
CURRENTLY WE HAVE A RACE THAT&apos;S
HAPPENING FOR MAYOR.
THERE IS AN INDEPENDENT
CANDIDATE RUNNING AGAINST MAYOR
TAYLOR.
WHETHER OR NOT THAT ELECTION IS
GOING TO BE CLOSE IS GOING TO
DEPEND ON THE VOTERS.
BUT WHAT THIS WOULD WHAT THE
IMPACT OF THIS WOULD HAVE IS
REDUCING THE GENERAL ELECTION
TURNOUT COUNCIL, ELIMINATING
DEMOCRATIC VOTERS STRAIGHT
TICKET DEMOCRATIC VOTERS.
THE EFFORT HERE TO REDUCE THE
INFLUENCE OF STRAIGHT TICKET
DEMOCRATIC VOTERS COUNCIL
MEMBER RUMBLY WHILE WE TOUCHED
A NERVE YOU KNOW IF ANYONE IS
DISMISSING THE INTELLIGENCE
OF VOTERS, IT&apos;S THOSE WHO DON&apos;T
WANT TO ALLOW THE VOTERS TO
DECIDE ON THIS.
WE ARE KEEPING THE VOTERS FROM
WEIGHING IN ON THIS MATTER.
YOU KNOW, SO ANYHOW, WHAT WE&apos;VE
SEEN HERE IS JUST AN
ACCELERATION OF CONCENTRATION
OF WEALTH AND POWER IN THE
POLITICAL SYSTEM HERE IN ANN
ARBOR STARTED MANY YEARS AGO
AND IT CONTINUES TO GAIN STEAM
IF YOU DON&apos;T COME UP WITH A
POLITICAL VEIN HERE LOCALLY
THAT IS CONTROLLED BY A HANDFUL
OF INDIVIDUALS WITH THE VAST
AMOUNTS OF MONEY AND RESOURCES
,YOU&apos;LL NEVER GET A CHANCE TO
SIT UP HERE AT THIS TABLE.
HIS TABLE WELCOMES DIVERSITY AS
LONG AS THEY ARE OK WITH IT.
IF YOU DON&apos;T FIT THE MOLD THEN
GOOD LUCK MAY HAVE SWING POWER
CORRUPTS ABSOLUTE AND I THINK
WE&apos;VE REACHED A POINT HERE
LOCALLY WHERE THAT&apos;S THE ONLY
THING THAT&apos;S GOING TO ALLOW FOR
GREATER POLITICAL PARTICIPATION
.
YOU KNOW, WE KEEP HEARING ABOUT
THE OTHER SIDE, YOU KNOW, LIKE
THERE&apos;S ONLY TWO PARTIES LIKE
THAT THAT&apos;S THAT THERE&apos;S A HUGE
FAILURE IN THIS COUNTRY AND
THAT SOCIETY BECAUSE OF THE TWO
PARTY SYSTEM.
YOU KNOW, IF YOU DON&apos;T IF
YOU&apos;RE NOT A DEMOCRAT, YOU HAVE
TO BE A REPUBLICAN LIKE THERE&apos;S
NO OTHER CHOICE RIGHT NOW
THERE&apos;S MANY DIFFERENT CHOICES
AND AGAIN THIS IS TO GIVE IT TO
THE VOTERS TO DECIDE WE&apos;RE NOT
MAKING THIS DECISION.
THIS WOULD SIMPLY SEND THIS TO
THE VOTERS AND THEN ALL THESE
ARGUMENTS THAT ARE BEING PUT
FORTH CAN BE PUT FORTH DURING
THE DURING THE ELECTION DURING
THE CAMPAIGN AND THEN OF COURSE
HAVE THE INFORMED VOTER MAKE
THE DECISION WE&apos;RE NOT MAKING A
DECISION FOR THEM OR HERE IS I
THINK WE&apos;VE GOT A LOT OF PEOPLE
WHO ARE SCARED TO TAKE THIS AND
LET THE VOTERS MAKE THAT
DECISION.
SO CONFIDENT IN YOUR POSITION,
LET THE VOTERS DECIDE COUNCIL
MEMBER BRIGS I THINK CAN&apos;T
REMEMBER GRISWOLD HAD CALLED A
QUESTION PRIOR TO I DON&apos;T
BELIEVE EVERYONE HAS AS I
RECOLLECT OUR CALL TO QUESTION
NONWAGE RIGHT.
&gt;&gt; IT&apos;S FINE WE CAN PONTIFICATE
.
YEAH.
NOT EVERYONE HAS SPOKEN IN A
COUPLE OF WEEKS.
OK, SO YOU KNOW, I THINK THE
ONLY FOLKS THAT I&apos;VE CLAMORING
FOR A NONPARTIZAN ELECTIONS ARE
FOLKS THAT ARE AT THE COUNCIL
TABLE.
I HAVE NOT HEARD A BIG
OUTPOURING ON THIS ISSUE FROM
FROM THE ELECTORATE RATHER I
THINK THAT FROM MY EXPERIENCE
THE ELECTORATE AT LARGE IS A
PRETTY PRETTY PROUD OF BEING A
DEMOCRATIC TOWN.
AND AS OTHERS HAVE MENTIONED,
THERE&apos;S NOTHING STOPPING
CANDIDATES FROM FROM RUNNING IF
THE OTHER PARTY LABELS I THINK
A LOT OF GREAT POINTS HAVE BEEN
MADE ONE POINT THAT HASN&apos;T BEEN
MADE YET AROUND WHAT HAPPENS
WHEN THE PARTIZAN LABEL IS
REMOVED IS WHAT ARE THERE?
YOU KNOW, ONE OF THE CUES THAT
PEOPLE THE RESEARCHERS HAVE
FOUND THAT THAT VOTERS TURN TO
IS THE ETHNICITY OF OF
INDIVIDUALS NAMES AND WHO THAT
ENDS UP FAVORING IS WHITE UPPER
CLASS RESIDENTS LARGELY SO I
THINK ONE OF THE THE PIECES
THAT THAT WE CAN BE PROUD OF IN
ANN ARBOR IS THAT WE HAVE IN
OUR INCOMING COUNCIL THE MOST
DIVERSE COUNCIL I BELIEVE IN
ANN ARBOR HISTORY I WE HAVE
NINE WOMEN COMING IN TO
AFRICAN-AMERICANS TO BE WHEN
THE CITY COUNCIL TO
AFRICAN-AMERICANS, TO
ASIAN-AMERICANS WHEN LGBTQ
MEMBER
YOU KNOW, THIS IS
SOMETHING THAT WE CAN BE PROUD
OF IN ANN ARBOR THAT WHAT OUR
WHAT OUR ELECTIONS ARE
RESULTING IN AND I&apos;M NOT
ANXIOUS TO TO TO CHANGE THAT
CHANGE THAT MODEL ESPECIALLY
WHEN THAT SEEMS TO BE ONLY
BEING CALLED FOR AT THE COUNCIL
TABLE COUNCIL FOR HAYNER
THANKS.
&gt;&gt; YEAH.
NOBODY LIKES TO CHANGE ANYTHING
THAT KEEPS THEM IN POWER.
&gt;&gt; IT&apos;S OK TO PUT A TO PUT IT
THIS IS ALL ABOUT PUTTING A
QUESTION BEFORE THE WELL
INFORMED VOTERS YOU&apos;RE AFRAID
TO DO THAT.
THERE&apos;S SOMETHING GOING ON
THERE.
&gt;&gt; I THINK WE KNOW THAT IN A
GENERAL ELECTION WITH A
STRAIGHT TICKET STATE VOTING IN
THIS COMMUNITY THAT REALLY
SOMEBODY WHO DOESN&apos;T HAVE A D
IN FRONT THEIR NAME DOESN&apos;T
HAVE A CHANCE NOW SETTING ASIDE
THE COMMENTS THAT NONPARTISAN
ELECTIONS ARE RACIST OR
CLASSIST, WHICH I DON&apos;T AGREE
WITH, I THINK THERE WAS A VERY
GOOD DESCRIPTION AT THIS TABLE
FROM MY COLLEAGUE ABOUT THE
CONCERNS THAT EXIST CURRENTLY
WITH A PARTIZAN ELECTION SYSTEM
.
&gt;&gt; YOU COULD BE A CANDIDATE
LIKE MYSELF AND YOU COULD GO TO
THE ENDORSEMENT MEETING AND YOU
COULD HAVE A COUPLE A COUPLE
OF COUNCIL MEMBERS SHOW UP AND
MUSTER UP OTHER PEOPLE AND
VIOLATE THE WASHTENAW COUNTY
DEMS RULES TO BE ALLOWED TO GET
VOTING CARD THAT VERY DAY AND
DRAG A BUNCH OF PEOPLE AT THAT
MEETING WHO WERE MEMBERS UNTIL
THAT VERY DAY AND PAY YOUR
TWENTY BUCKS AND SIGN THEM UP
THAT VERY DAY TO TRY AND KEEP
SOMEBODY LIKE ME OFF THE BALLOT
SO I DON&apos;T GET ENDORSED.
I DON&apos;T GET IN THE NEWSPAPER
THAT CIRCULATED TO TWENTY
THOUSAND RESIDENTS IS HERE AND
SHE SAID IT WAS LIKE A BAD
THING KNOW WELL IF IT&apos;S A BAD
THING LET&apos;S GET RID OF THAT AND
OF COURSE SEVEN OF YOU VOTED TO
KICK ME OFF THIS BODY TWICE.
YEAH.
HERE I STAND WITH A D IN FRONT
OF MY NAME AND WE DIDN&apos;T HAVE A
STRAIGHT TICKET VOTING WHEN I
RAN.
THEY HAD TO FILL IN THAT BUBBLE
IN FRONT OF ME AND YOU HAD A
CHOICE NOW I WOULD SUSPECT THAT
SOME OF THE VOTES THAT WENT TO
MY OPPONENT WERE THE TWELVE
HUNDRED SOME PEOPLE WHO VOTED
FOR THE TRUMP TICKET IN THAT
SAME YEAR THINKING IT WAS A
REPUBLICAN UNDER THE GUISE
OF AN INDEPENDENT.
OF COURSE IT COULDN&apos;T HAVE BEEN
MORE MISTAKEN ABOUT THAT AND
IT&apos;S JUST AS WELL I THOUGHT WE
HAD A GREAT ELECTION DEBATE,
YOU KNOW, SERIES OF DEBATES AND
CONVERSATIONS.
BUT THIS IS JUST THE FEAR
OF PUTTING SOMETHING BEFORE THE
VOTERS IS JUST I IT&apos;S
UNFATHOMABLE TO ME IT&apos;S
UNEXPLAINABLE EXCEPT TO
CONSIDER THAT THERE IS A VERY
GOOD FEAR THAT THE WAY OF LIFE
THAT WE HAVE SO MUCH ENJOYED
WILL GO AWAY COUNTS NO SONG.
&gt;&gt; I BELIEVE I&apos;M THE ONLY
PERSON AT THIS TABLE WHO&apos;S
ACTUALLY BEEN ELECTED IN A
NONPARTIZAN ELECTION WITH I
THINK ALMOST 27000 VOTES
THROUGH THE ENTIRE DISTRICT
LIBRARY THAT WAS IN 2016.
MY RACE COSTS SEVEN HUNDRED
DOLLARS LARGER CATCHMENT.
WE&apos;RE TALKING ABOUT THE CITY,
THE TOWNSHIPS.
IT&apos;S THE SAME GEOGRAPHY AS THE
SCHOOL DISTRICT AND THEIR
SCHOOL BOARD WHICH IS ALSO
NONPARTISAN.
&gt;&gt; SO I GUESS I&apos;M GOING TO JUST
KIND OF SPEAK TO HOW WE&apos;VE BEEN
ON A STEADY PATH TOWARDS
FIGHTING VOTER
DISENFRANCHISEMENT SINCE TRUMP
AND I&apos;M REALLY PROUD OF OUR
COMMUNITY FOR STEPPING UP.
I WAS ON THE EXECUTIVE
COMMITTEE FOR PROMOTE THE VOTE
THAT AND IF WE IF WE CAN THANK
OUR CITY CLERK FOR ALL THE WORK
SHE&apos;S DONE IN IMPROVING ACCESS
TO ABSENTEE BALLOTS, THAT&apos;S
PART OF A WORK OF NON PARTIZAN
GROUPS ACLU LEGAL WOMEN VOTERS.
WE&apos;VE SEEN THE FRUIT OF LABOR
BEING BORN.
WE&apos;VE SEEN VOTERS, NOT
POLITICIANS FIGHTING FOR THIS
RIGHT TO GET ON THE BALLOT.
THERE ARE PARTY ISSUES THAT OUR
COMMUNITY IS CONCERNED ABOUT,
GREATLY CONCERNED ABOUT AND
WHETHER IDENTIFYING CANDIDATES
AND FOLKS WHO WILL DETERMINE
THEIR QUALITY OF LIVING, HOW
THEY CHOOSE THE COMMUNITY THEY
LIVE IN, I THINK THEY LOOK FOR
REPRESENTATIVES THAT REFLECT
THEIR VALUES IF OTHER PARTIES
WANT REFLECT DIFFERENT VALUES.
I THINK WE&apos;VE SEEN THAT AND I
THINK I&apos;M REALLY PROUD OF OUR
CITY TO STAND UP TO MAKE SURE
THAT OUR MOST DISENFRANCHIZED
FOLKS HAVE ACCESS TO THE
BALLOT, UNDERSTAND OUR VALUES
WHEN IT COMES TO UNDOCUMENTED
FOLKS WHEN THERE ARE ISSUES
THAT CAME UP FROM 2006 UNTIL
NOW AND A LOT OF US HAVE BEEN
ON THE DOORS OF DIFFERENT
CANDIDATES.
WE&apos;D NAME DEBBIE DINGELL HERE
OFTEN AT THIS TABLE YOUSEF
RAHBI WE NAME COUNTY
COMMISSIONERS WHEN WE TALK
SOCIAL SERVICE AGENCY FUNDING
WE KNOW FOLKS ARE FIGHTING FOR
EVERY SINGLE DOLLAR AT THE
STATE FOR EVERY VOTE TO MAKE
SURE THAT WE ARE FAIRLY
REPRESENTED FOR THE FIRST TIME
IN ALMOST 40 YEARS, DEMOCRATS
WILL HAVE THE CHANCE TO COME TO
MAJORITY BECAUSE
OF REDISTRICTING AND FOR AN
ARBOR TO STEP ASIDE AND SAY
WE&apos;RE ACTUALLY NOT PART OF THAT
CONVERSATION.
IS THAT WHERE WE ARE NOW?
IS THIS HOW WE REPORT BACK TO
OUR CONSTITUENTS AND SAY THESE
VALUES THAT WE FOUGHT FOR FROM
2016 UNTIL NOW CAN BE PUT
ASIDE?
SO WE ARE NOW LIKE THE LIBRARY
AND LIKE THE SCHOOL BOARD?
I DON&apos;T THINK THAT&apos;S THE CASE.
I THINK WHEN FOLKS LOOK AT THE
VOTER GUIDE, THEY WATCH THE
DEBATES, THEY CHECK WE ARE NOT
THE CITY THAT&apos;S GOING TO BE
TALKING ABOUT THE FORWARD PARTY
.
WHAT ARE WE TALKING ABOUT HERE?
WE ARE ALL ELECTED AS
DEMOCRATS.
ALL OF US CANCER COUNCIL MEMBER
GRANT THINKS JUST QUICKLY, YOU
KNOW, IF WE LOOK AT WHAT THIS
RESOLUTION IS ACTUALLY ASKING
TO DO, IT&apos;S ASKING TO PUT
SOMETHING BEFORE THE VOTERS TO
CHANGE THE CHARTER AND THAT&apos;S
SUPPOSED TO BE A DELIBERATIVE
PROCESS IF IT DOESN&apos;T HAPPEN AT
THE COUNCIL TABLE, THERE IS A
MEANS OF YOU GATHERING
SIGNATURES.
BUT PART OF OUR RESPONSIBILITY
AS COUNCIL MEMBERS IS IF WE DO
CHOOSE TO PUT SOMETHING ON THE
CHARTER, WE DON&apos;T DO IT BECAUSE
WE&apos;RE BAITED AND ASKED IF WE&apos;RE
SCARED WHAT WOULD HAPPEN.
&gt;&gt; WE DO IT NOT BECAUSE WE&apos;RE
BAITED BUT BECAUSE AND YOU
KNOW, AFTER WE&apos;VE ALL SAT
TOGETHER FOR FOUR YEARS, I
WOULD HOPE YOU HAD SOME OF YOU
WOULD UNDERSTAND THAT I&apos;M
ACTUALLY NOT SCARED BY ANYTHING
THAT YOU SAY AND BUT THAT WE DO
IT BECAUSE BECAUSE WE REALLY
THINK THAT THIS IS SOMETHING
THAT THE VOTERS SHOULD CONSIDER
AND DELIBERATE AND HAVE A
COMMUNITY CONVERSATION AROUND.
&gt;&gt; THAT&apos;S WHAT THE CHARTER
AMENDMENT IS AND THAT&apos;S THE
RESPONSIBILITY AS A COUNCIL
MEMBER SO SO REFUSING TO PUT
SOMETHING ON THE BALLOT JUST
BECAUSE SOMEONE SAYS LIKE HEY,
ARE YOU SCARED AND LIKE WE
SHOULD DO THIS.
&gt;&gt; IT SHOULD BE A MUCH MORE
SERIOUS PROCESS.
SARA NELSON, I APPRECIATE THAT
PERSPECTIVE QUITE A LOT AND THE
COMMUNITY CONVERSATION THAT I
SEE THIS RESOLUTION PUSHING US
TOWARDS IS UNDERSTANDING WHAT
THAT D NOW MEANS IN OUR LOCAL
COMMUNITY.
BUT BETWEEN TWENTY EIGHTEEN AND
TWENTY TWENTY THE COST OF OUR
CAMPAIGNS, THE MONEY INVESTED
IN OUR CAMPAIGNS SUDDENLY
DOMINATED BY LARGE MONEY DONORS
TRIPLED AND QUADRUPLED.
AND IT WASN&apos;T JUST AN ANOMALY
BECAUSE OF THE PANDEMIC THIS IS
THE NEW REALITY.
THERE ARE PEOPLE IN OUR
COMMUNITY WHO ARE TALKING ABOUT
YOU KNOW, JUST TONIGHT WHEN WE
WERE ALL OF THE ACTIVISTS WHO
WERE TALKING ABOUT RIGHT TO
RENEW THEY ARE KEENLY AWARE
OF HOW MUCH RESISTANCE THERE
WAS TO TENANTS RIGHTS WHEN WE
STARTED CONVERSATIONS A YEAR
AGO AND SO MUCH FEEDBACK THEY
WERE ABOUT CONSULTING WITH
PROPERTY OWNERS AND TRYING TO
SEE WHICH WAY THE WIND WAS
BLOWING IN TERMS OF PROFIT
INTERESTS IN THIS TOWN.
THAT&apos;S THE CONVERSATION THE
THOUGHTFUL CONVERSATION.
I ACTUALLY DO BELIEVE THAT OUR
COMMUNITY IS SMART ENOUGH TO
HAVE AND I ACTUALLY DON&apos;T KNOW
THAT FUNDAMENTALLY ANYONE WILL
BE AT SUCH A DISADVANTAGE.
THOSE FOLKS WHO HAVE BEEN ABLE
TO LEVERAGE SO MUCH MONEY IT
MAY BE THAT ALL OF THAT MONEY
CAN BE LEVERAGED IN EXACTLY THE
SAME WAY WITHOUT THE LABEL.
AND SO I GUESS I WOULD DISAGREE
WITH COUNCIL MEMBER RAMOGI IN
THE IDEA THAT ANYONE MIGHT BE
SCARED.
I AM SURPRISED THAT PEOPLE
WOULD BE RELUCTANT TO PUT THIS
ON THE BALLOT BECAUSE TO HEAR
PEOPLE TALK AT THIS TABLE IT&apos;S
SUCH A PREPOSTEROUS IDEA SURELY
ARE VERY, VERY SMART COMMUNITY
WOULD JUST BE REJECTED OUT
OF HAND.
BUT I CAN RECALL THE QUESTION
HAS EVERYONE SPOKEN BECAUSE I
MEAN IS THAT POSSIBLE IF
EVERYONE HAS SPOKEN WE&apos;VE GOT
COUNCIL MEMBER A READING ROOM
LOEWY STILL IN THE Q AND AN
COUNSEL FOR GRISWOLD.
&gt;&gt; I JUST WANT TO THANKS DE&apos;ATH
ESPECIALLY MATT TALLNESS STILL
WITH US.
&gt;&gt; IS THERE ANY OBJECTION TO
CALLING THE QUESTION ROLL CALL
TO MAKE IT QUICK BUT I CAN WAIT
.
&gt;&gt; HOWEVER, PLEASE TURN TO THE
COUNCIL MEMBER DESH THIS IS A
ROLL CALL VOTE TO CALL THE
QUESTION OR I&apos;M SORRY THANK
NONE AND I THINK I I THINK
WE&apos;RE JUST ROLLING WITH THE
VOTE ON THE MAIN MOTION WITH I
WOULD LIKE TO AN OPPORTUNITY
COUNCIL MEMBER ROMARIO AGAIN
THIS HAS NO CHANCE IN PASSING.
WE VISITED THIS TWICE BEFORE
IT&apos;S BEEN VETOED.
THIS HAS ZERO CHANCE.
THIS WAS BROUGHT UP FOR
PROBABLY FOUR FOR ENTERTAINMENT
I GUESS VENTING FRUSTRATION.
I DO THINK THERE NEEDS TO BE A
CHANGE IN THE POLITICAL
STRUCTURE HERE
LOCALLY AND I
HOPE TO JOIN OTHERS IN
GATHERING SIGNATURES TO BRING
THIS QUESTION TO THE VOTERS.
THIS SAME ISSUE NOT THE SAME
ISSUE BUT THE ISSUE THAT THAT
THIS COUNCIL DIDN&apos;T WANT TO PUT
FORWARD SOMETHING SO VOTERS HAD
TO GO OUT AND COLLECT
SIGNATURES HAS BEEN DONE BEFORE
AND I THINK THERE&apos;S ENOUGH
COMMUNITY SENT MEANT TO DO IT
AGAIN.
ALL IT TAKES IS A THOUSAND
SIGNATURES IN EACH WARD.
&gt;&gt; THAT&apos;S ALL FOLKS WILL ALL BE
UNEMPLOYED FROM FROM THIS TABLE
HERE SHORTLY.
&gt;&gt; IT&apos;S TIME TO GET SOME
SIGNATURES COUNTERASSAULT.
SO LET&apos;S TALK ABOUT MONEY IN
LOCAL POLITICS.
THE MAXIMUM EFFORT FOR LOCAL
RACES IS A THOUSAND FIFTY FROM
A DONOR.
YOU ALSO HAVE TO DISCLOSE YOUR
EMPLOYER.
LET&apos;S TALK ABOUT MONEY IN
MICHIGAN, POLITICS IN MICHIGAN
AND THE EXPENSE TO RUN BALLOT
INITIATIVES TO SAY PROTECT
REPRODUCTIVE FREEDOM TO PROTECT
OUR VOTER RIGHTS.
IT COSTS MONEY FOR GRASSROOTS
ORGANIZERS, FOR MAILERS AND
AREN&apos;T WE LUCKY TO HAVE FOLKS
CARE ENOUGH ABOUT OUR CITY, OUR
LIBRARIES OR OUR STATE TO FIGHT
FOR FOUR ESSENTIAL RIGHTS?
I THINK IF YOU TALK TO FOLKS
WHO GIVE FIVE, TEN, FIFTEEN
DOLLARS EACH ONE OF US I THINK
THE MAJORITY OF US HAD
DONATIONS OF LESS THAN ONE
HUNDRED DOLLARS.
PLEASE LOOK THAT UP AND CORRECT
ME IF THAT&apos;S THE RIGHT IF
THAT&apos;S INCORRECT.
BUT I THINK I&apos;VE SAID THIS
BEFORE CAMPAIGNS DON&apos;T PAY FOR
THEMSELVES.
SCIENCE DON&apos;T PAY FOR
THEMSELVES AND IF WE&apos;RE TALKING
ABOUT COMING OUT OF SOME VERY
DIFFICULT TIMES FROM SIX YEARS
GO I&apos;M REALLY GLAD THAT FOLKS
ARE PAYING ATTENTION NOW
BECAUSE LOOK HOW FAR WE&apos;VE LOOK
HOW FAR WE&apos;VE COME.
THOSE ARE THOSE ARE INVESTMENTS
THAT EVERYDAY PEOPLE HAVE MADE
IN THIS COMMUNITY BECAUSE
THEY&apos;RE AFRAID AND THEY FEEL
LIKE IT&apos;S OK.
IT&apos;S SUPPORTING CANDIDATES WHO
SPEAK TO THEIR VALUES AND WHO
TRY TO SHOW TRUE LEADERSHIP.
SO TELL ME WHEN DONATIONS ARE
QUESTIONABLE AT CITY COUNCIL
FOR DEBBIE DINGELL, FOR JASON
MORGAN PURSUE SWOOSHING FOR
YOURSELF.
ROBBY ARE THOSE ARE THE FOUR
DEBBIE STABENOW, SENATOR PETERS
,SERIOUSLY WHERE IS IT WHERE
IS IT DARK MONEY?
WHEN DOES IT BECOME DARK MONEY
?
&gt;&gt; I THINK WE CAN ANSWER THAT
QUESTION FOR THE DISCUSSION
ROLL-CALL VOTE ON THE MAIN
MOTIONS.
&gt;&gt; PLEASE START AT COUNTERMAN
BRITISH COUNTERPART DISH NO
HOLDS BARRED AS WELL.
&gt;&gt; YES.
CUSTOMER SONG NO MORE GROUND NO
THAT&apos;S MY WE&apos;RE DENHA NO MORE
RETAILOR NO MORE IHR NO ELSMERE
NELSON YES ELSMERE BRIGGS NO
THAT&apos;S WHERE I&apos;M GOING.
&gt;&gt; YES IT&apos;S MORE HAYNER YES
WILSONVILLE DC FOR RESOLUTION
TO REVISE CHAPTER FORTY RIGHTS
OF WAY STREET TREES VEGETATION
MANAGEMENT MOVE BY COUNCILOR
GRISWOLD&apos;S COUNCIL MAHINA
DISCUSSION OF DC FOR THIS IS
ASKING STAFF TO BRING FORWARD
REVISIONS TO CHAPTER FORTY
WHICH HAS BEEN UNDER REVIEW FOR
OVER A YEAR NOW.
I DON&apos;T EXPECT IT TO COME BACK
UNTIL AFTER T.S. ONE IS
APPROVED BECAUSE PART OF WHAT
IT SPECIFIES HAS TO DO WITH
SITE DISTANCE TRIANGLES AND WE
CAN&apos;T VERY WELL REVISE CHAPTER
FORTY TO HAVE VALID DISTANCE
TRIANGLES WHEN WE JUST PASSED
ONE THAT TOTALLY IGNORES SIGHT
DISTANCE.
&gt;&gt; SO ANYWAY I WANT TO THANK
ALL THE STAFF WHO&apos;VE WORKED ON
THIS.
I WANT TO THANK THE
ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION, THE
ENERGY COMMISSION, THE
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION, THE
LEGAL DEPARTMENT.
I FEEL LIKE I&apos;M AT THE OSCARS
BUT THERE ARE MANY PEOPLE TO
THANK AND I HOPE THAT WE CAN
BRING IT FORWARD IN THE NEAR
FUTURE.
SO HAYNER THANKS.
I&apos;D LIKE TO BE HERE AS A
SPONSOR BECAUSE CATHY IS KIND
OF DOING COUNCILWOMAN GRISWOLD
IS KIND OF DOING THIS BECAUSE
YOU KNOW, IT HAS BEEN OVER A
YEAR SINCE I OFFERED SOME
MODEST CHANGES TO CHAPTER FORTY
,THE ESSENCE OF WHICH WAS TO
NOT NO LONGER PUNISH PEOPLE WHO
WERE TRYING TO HAVE FOOD
GARDENS IN THEIR FRONT YARD
THAT PERHAPS EXCEEDED EIGHTEEN
INCHES IN HEIGHT OR WANTED TO
HAVE, YOU KNOW, WILDFLOWER OR
POLLINATOR GARDENS THAT EXISTED
OUTSIDE OF THE LANGUAGE
OF CHAPTER FORTY, WHICH IS VERY
RESTRICTIVE AND I MEAN I CAN&apos;T
AFTER TONIGHT&apos;S CONVERSATIONS I
CAN&apos;T EVEN COMPARE PICK AN APT
ANALOGY BUT YOU WOULD HAVE
THOUGHT I WAS TRYING TO GET
TRUMP ELECTED AGAIN OR WHATEVER
YOU KNOW THE WAY I JUST WANTED
TO ADD ADD A FEW WORDS TO THIS
CHAPTER 40 AND IT MUST HAVE HIT
HOME SOMEHOW EVERYBODY LOST IT
AND I&apos;M SURE COMMUNITY
STANDARDS IS QUITE BUSY
HUSTLING AROUND TOWN TAPING
TICKETS TO PEOPLE&apos;S FRONT DOORS
IF THEY&apos;RE THEIR AVERAGE HEIGHT
THE MEDIAN IS IN EXCESS
OF EIGHTEEN INCHES.
BUT AS I SAID AT THE TIME WHEN
I OFFERED THE FIRST CHAPTER FOR
CHANGES IF YOU HAVE A 60 FOOT
TREE AND A BUNCH OF THREE INCH
GRASS YOUR AVERAGE HEIGHT IS IN
EXCESS OF EIGHTEEN INCHES AND
SO THE LANGUAGE OF CHAPTER
FORTY WAS WRITTEN IN SUCH A WAY
AS TO INVITE THE CATASTROPHIC
INTERPRETATION AND CREATE A
SORT OF A NARC SYSTEM WITH YOUR
NEIGHBORS.
SOMEBODY DOESN&apos;T LIKE YOU.
&gt;&gt; THEY CALL COMMUNITY
STANDARDS AND TELL THEM YOUR
GRASS IS TOO HIGH.
WELL THE GRASS SHOULD BE TOO
HIGH EVERYWHERE IF WE WANT TO
CONTINUE TO LIVE ON THIS PLANET
BECAUSE TO TO RESTRICT FOOD
GARDENS TO RESTRICT INDOOR
GARDENS AND ALL THE THINGS THAT
WE WERE DOING WITH CHAPTER
FORTY IS A BIG MISTAKE WHEN IT
COMES TO BIODIVERSITY AND
SUSTAINABILITY CLIMATE ACTION.
AND SO I APPRECIATE THIS COMING
FORWARD TO KIND MOVE THE NEEDLE
ALONG BECAUSE WE ARE WELL
OVERDUE TO EMBRACE A FRONT YARD
GARDENS, FRONT YARD POLLINATOR
GARDENS AND THE LIKE.
SO OF COURSE I SUPPORT THIS.
THANK YOU FOR DISCUSSING
CUSTOMER DISH.
YEAH, I&apos;M JUST A LITTLE
CONFUSED.
THE LANGUAGE OF THE RESOLUTION
IS THE RESOLVE CLAUSE IS THAT
THE REVISIONS TO CHAPTER FORTY
SECOND SECTION THREE BE
PRESENTED TO COUNCIL FOR
CONSIDERATION NOT LATER THAN
THE SECOND MEETING IN OCTOBER .
AM I AM I READING FROM THE
WRONG DRAFT.
OK SO AND YOU SAID YOU WANT
THEM TO BRING IT BACK IN THE
NEAR FUTURE SO I&apos;M NOT SURE WE
NEED TO EITHER AMEND THIS
LANGUAGE OR I WAS EXPECTING A
FRIENDLY AMENDMENT FROM YOU.
&gt;&gt; OK, I&apos;M HAPPY TO MAKE A
FRIENDLY AMENDMENT BUT I&apos;M
SORRY WE DIDN&apos;T COMMUNICATE.
I THOUGHT YOU SAID THAT WAS
ALREADY DONE OK SO I&apos;D LIKE TO
AMEND THE RESULT CLAUSE TO SAY
THAT THE REVISIONS TO CHAPTER
FORTY SECTION THREE BE
PRESENTED TO COUNCIL FOR
CONSIDERATION BY THE FIRST
MEETING IN OCTOBER NOVEMBER
NOVEMBER THE FIRST MEETING IN
NOVEMBER IS THAT THAT&apos;S
FRIENDLY.
&gt;&gt; ALL RIGHT.
COUNCILOR GRISWOLD, IS THAT
FRIENDLY?
THE BODY SURE.
&gt;&gt; I ASSUME STAFF HAS NO
CONCERNS WITH THAT.
&gt;&gt; MR BUTTERWORTH, THANK YOU.
&gt;&gt; I&apos;M NOT AWARE OF ANY ISSUES
WITH IT.
THANK YOU.
&gt;&gt; COUNCILOR GRISWOLD.
THE LEGAL DEPARTMENT HAS BEEN
COORDINATING THIS MOST RECENTLY
AND AND ONE OF THE PURPOSES IS
TO REDUCE STAFF EFFORT TO MAKE
IT VERY CLEAR WHAT&apos;S ALLOWED
AND WHAT ISN&apos;T ALLOWED SO THAT
YOU DON&apos;T HAVE TO HAVE A
TRANSPORTATION ENGINEER GO OUT
AND AND MEASURE WHATEVER THEY
MEASURE AND YOU DON&apos;T HAVE TO
HAVE A LANDSCAPE EXPERT GO OUT
THERE AND DETERMINE IF WHAT
YOU&apos;RE GROWING IS REALLY
NATURAL OR NOT THAT ALL OF THIS
WILL BE SPECIFIED PROBABLY IN A
COMPANY PROCEDURES EDUCATIONAL
MATERIAL.
BUT MOST IMPORTANTLY I WOULD
LIKE TO SEE PROACTIVE
ENFORCEMENT.
WE HAVE SCHOOL CROSSWALKS THAT
I HAVE COMPLAINED ABOUT.
THE VEGETATION EXCEEDS SIX FEET
RIGHT AT THE CURB AND IF WE
HAVE PROACTIVE ENFORCEMENT AND
IT&apos;S CONSISTENTLY ENFORCED THAT
WILL JUST BE THE WAY WE DO IT
IN ANN ARBOR AND THAT WILL TAKE
THE BURDEN OFF THE COMMUNITY
STANDARDS DEPARTMENT.
SO I I THANK THE LEGAL
DEPARTMENT AGAIN AND HOPEFULLY
WE&apos;LL HAVE THIS COMPLETED SOON
FURTHER DISCUSSION COUNCIL
MEMBER BRIGS I GUESS I WOULD
JUST APPRECIATE A LITTLE BIT
OF FEEDBACK FROM STAFF AROUND
NOW THE MATS UNDER
CONSIDERATION FOR THE FIRST
MEETING IN NOVEMBER.
I ASSUME THAT THERE HAVE BEEN
SOME PERHAPS SOME REASONS FOR
TIME IT&apos;S BEEN TAKING BUT DOES
THIS SEEM LIKE A REASONABLE
TIMELINE?
WELL, I THINK I JUST WANTED TO
SAY THAT YES, IT DOES SEEM LIKE
A REASONABLE TIMELINE AND I
THINK WE KIND OF INDICATED THAT
IN A A QUESTION REGARDING THE
AGENDA THAT WAS ADDRESSED THAT
WE ANSWERED ALTHOUGH I I AT THE
BEGINNING OF THIS DISCUSSION
THERE WAS SOME RELATING THE
CHAPTER 40 TO TAKE ONE AND
SOMETHING ABOUT IT WAITING
UNTIL T ONE WAS RESOLVED.
AND SO I WANT TO MAKE SURE THAT
I UNDERSTAND THAT BECAUSE RIGHT
NOW THE FIRST MEETING IN
NOVEMBER IS WHEN THE TEAM WON
CONSIDERATION WOULD ALSO BE
COMING BACK BECAUSE IT&apos;S A
ZONING ORDINANCE.
SO
IT WILL COME BACK IN 30 DAYS
.
SO IT&apos;S VERY.
WERE YOU TRYING TO HAVE SOME
CONCLUSION TO THE TWO ONE
DISCUSSION BEFORE THIS TOOK
PLACE?
&gt;&gt; NO, I APPRECIATE WHAT YOU&apos;RE
DOING AND THIS IS FINE.
THE RELATION TO C C ONE IS THAT
WE ARE APPROVING A ZONING
CATEGORY THAT IS IN VIOLATION
OF SITE DISTANCE STANDARDS AND
I HOPE THAT WHEN WE DO PASS
CHAPTER FORTY IT WILL BE VERY
CLEAR WHAT STANDARDS WE&apos;RE
USING BUT THE TWO ARE TOTALLY
SEPARATE.
&gt;&gt; EXCELLENT.
THANK YOU COUNCILOR.
BRING THIS TO THE FLOOR.
I WILL OF COURSE OF COURSE
OBSERVE THAT WE ARE NOT
APPROVING ONE AT THE FIRST
MEETING IN NOVEMBER THAT ONE
DESIGNATION ALREADY EXISTS AND
IT IS NOT GOING TO BE AMENDED
BY ANYTHING WE DO IN NOVEMBER.
WHAT WE ARE DOING IS WE ARE
ALTERING THE MAP THE TO
IDENTIFY NEW PARCELS TO WHICH
THE TICK ONE DESIGNATION MAY
MAY APPLY FOR THE DISCUSSION.
&gt;&gt; MR DENHA, I&apos;D LIKE TO ASK A
QUESTION FOR CLARIFICATION.
I THOUGHT I HEARD COUNCILOR
GRISWOLD SAY THERE WOULD BE
AGGRESSIVE PROACTIVE
ENFORCEMENT SEPARATE FROM
COMMUNITY STANDARDS.
&gt;&gt; IS THAT CORRECT?
NO, NOT NECESSARILY SEPARATE
BUT IT WOULD START WITH
EDUCATION AND NOTICES AND
DEVELOP INTO A STANDARD AND
I&apos;LL LEAVE THAT UP TO THE LEGAL
DEPARTMENT FOR WHAT THEY&apos;RE
PLANNING THEIR
WELL I CAN
SIMPLY SAY THIS AT LEAST AS IT
STANDS NOW THERE&apos;S THERE&apos;S NO
DIFFERENT APPROACH TO
ENFORCEMENT.
IT WOULD STILL BE ENFORCED BY
COMMUNITY STANDARDS.
I THINK THE IDEA BEHIND SOME
OF WHAT WE ARE DRAFTING IS TO
TRY TO SIMPLIFY THIS SECTION
OF ORDINANCE AS MUCH AS
POSSIBLE SO THAT IT COULD BE
MORE EFFECTIVELY ENFORCED BY
COMMUNITY STANDARDS.
I THINK COUNCIL MEMBER HAYNER
HAD MENTIONED SOME OF THE I&apos;LL
SAY SOME OF THE LANGUAGE IN THE
ORDINANCE AS IT STANDS RIGHT
NOW IS NOT THE MOST IT&apos;S JUST
NOT THE EASIEST TO ENFORCE.
SOME OF IT REQUIRES I&apos;LL JUST
SAY SOME SUBJECTIVITY AND
THAT&apos;S WHAT&apos;S BEEN CAUSING SOME
ISSUES WITH THE ORDINANCE.
SO WE&apos;RE TRYING TO ADDRESS THAT
AS PART OF THAT.
BUT IT SHOULD BE EASIER TO
ENFORCE BY THE SAME DEPARTMENT.
THERE&apos;S NO EXPANSION
OF ENFORCEMENT.
IT&apos;S JUST A MATTER OF TRYING TO
GET IT TO BE CLEAR LANGUAGE
THAT CAN BE ENFORCED BY
COMMUNITY STANDARDS.
WHO IS RESPONSIBLE FOR THE
ENFORCEMENT NOW FOR THE
DISCUSSION RAKOVA ARE PLEASED
TO HAVE COUNCIL MEMBER DESH
COUNCIL MEMBER JEFF YES.
&gt;&gt; COUNCILOR GRISWOLD YES.
CONTROVERSAL YES.
COUNTERPROGRAM YES.
THAT&apos;S OUR DENHA YES.
TAYLOR YES.
COUNCILOR.
YES THAT&apos;S AN AWESOME YES.
THAT&apos;S MORE BRICKS.
YES.
YES THAT&apos;S MORE HAYNER.
&gt;&gt; FOREFINGERS DC FIVE
YES.
RESOLUTION TO THE CITY THAT
&gt;&gt; FOREFINGERS DC FIVE
ARBER AFFORDABLE HOUSING
RESOLUTION TO THE CITY THAT
AGREEMENT FOR THE STANDARD
ARBER AFFORDABLE HOUSING
MOVED BY COUNCIL MEMBER SECOND
AGREEMENT FOR THE STANDARD
BY COUNCIL MEMBER DENHA
MOVED BY COUNCIL MEMBER SECOND
DISCUSSION PLEASE OF DC FIVE
BY COUNCIL MEMBER DENHA
COUNCIL MAHINA.
DISCUSSION PLEASE OF DC FIVE
&gt;&gt; THANKS JUST FOR THE
COUNCIL MAHINA.
LISTENING PUBLIC WHO&apos;S HANGING
&gt;&gt; THANKS JUST FOR THE
IN THERE.
LISTENING PUBLIC WHO&apos;S HANGING
I&apos;M GOING TO PUT THIS IN
IN THERE.
PERSPECTIVE.
I&apos;M GOING TO PUT THIS IN
THE STANDARD WAS ALLOWED TO
PERSPECTIVE.
EXCEED THE D ONE MAXIMUM ZONING
THE STANDARD WAS ALLOWED TO
WHICH IS SEVEN HUNDRED PERCENT
EXCEED THE D ONE MAXIMUM ZONING
FOR EVERY RATIO IN EXCHANGE FOR
WHICH IS SEVEN HUNDRED PERCENT
THIS AFFORDABLE HOUSING
FOR EVERY RATIO IN EXCHANGE FOR
AGREEMENT.
THIS AFFORDABLE HOUSING
AGREEMENT IS GIVING TWO
BEDROOMS OF THE FOUR TWENTY ONE
BEDROOMS IN THAT PROPERTY OVER
TO QUOTE UNQUOTE AFFORDABLE
HOUSING.
IT&apos;S ABOUT NIGHT SO ONE HALF
OF ONE PERCENT OF THAT PROPERTY
IS GOING TO BE AFFORDABLE
HOUSING.
NINETY NINE AND 1/2 PERCENT IS
GOING TO BE MARKET RATE
HOUSING.
NOW THE WAY THE THE WAY THIS
AGREEMENT READS, IT SETS THE
STANDARD THAT ANYONE WHO CAN
APPLY FOR THESE UNITS CAN ONLY
BE MAKING UP TO 80 PERCENT
OF VMI WHICH IN THE GREATER ANN
ARBOR AREA HERE BY MY
CALCULATION IS APPROXIMATELY
EIGHTY ONE THOUSAND DOLLARS A
YEAR NOW THE THIRTY PERCENT
INCOME CALCULATION THAT&apos;S IN
THERE LIMITS OR SETS THE RENT
AND IF I DID THE CALCULATION IT
AGAIN I&apos;M NOT SURE I DID.
IT&apos;S APPROXIMATELY TWELVE
HUNDRED DOLLARS A MONTH FOR
THIS SIX HUNDRED TO SIX OF EACH
FOR THE 600 SQUARE FOOT UNITS
SO WE SAW IN LOWERTOWN WHEN
THEY HAD AN AFFORDABLE HOUSING
AGREEMENT AS PART OF THE PUDI
THAT A WAITLIST IS CREATED FOR
THESE PROPERTIES THROUGH THE
HOUSING COMMISSION BUT THERE IS
NO MANDATE THAT THE SELECT FROM
THE BOTTOM OF THE LIST HELPING
THOSE WHO ARE MOST IN NEED IN
OUR COMMUNITY.
INDEED THE DEVELOPER OR THE
OWNER OF THE BUILDING IS
ALLOWED TO PICK FROM THE TOP SO
THEY CAN GIVE A TWELVE DOLLAR
APARTMENT TO SOMEBODY WHO&apos;S
MAKING EIGHTY THOUSAND DOLLARS
A YEAR AND ALL AT AFFORDABLE
HOUSING IN EXCHANGE FOR GETTING
A MUCH LARGER SQUARE FOOTAGE
BUILDING.
I DON&apos;T THINK THAT&apos;S A GOOD
DEAL FOR THE CITY.
I CONTINUE TO RECOMMEND THAT WE
VIEW OUR HOUSING GOALS AS A
PERCENTAGE OF THE TOTAL AND
WHEN YOU GOT NINETY NINE
PERCENT VERSUS ONE PERCENT AND
IF WE CONTINUE TO DO THIS WE
ARE NEVER GOING TO CATCH UP.
WE&apos;RE NEVER GOING TO HAVE THE
PERCENTAGE OF AFFORDABLE
HOUSING THAT WE NEED IN OUR
COMMUNITY AND SO THIS IS SORT
OF ONE OF THOSE THINGS WHERE WE
MADE THIS DEAL.
WE HAVE TO KIND OF APPROVE IT
HERE IT IS BEFORE US.
I DON&apos;T LIKE IT.
AND JUST FOR THAT FACT I&apos;M
GOING TO SAY NO TO IT.
I I GET IT THE DEAL WAS MADE.
I THINK IT&apos;S I THINK IT&apos;S A
POOR DEAL ON BEHALF OF THE
TAXPAYERS AND THE COMMUNITY.
SO I&apos;M GOING TO SAY NO TO IT
AND I THINK I THINK IF YOU
UNDERSTAND THAT WE CONSIDER
AFFORDABLE SOMEBODY MAKE AN
EIGHTY GRAND A YEAR YOU SEE THE
PROBLEM WE HAVE IN OUR
COMMUNITY.
SO YES, IT&apos;S A BIG NO.
I HAVE A QUESTION FOR THE CITY
ATTORNEYS WHO ARE HERE AND I
JUST WANTED TO CLARIFY ABOUT
THE TERMS OF THIS DEAL.
IS THIS NOT FOLLOWING A FORMULA
THAT IS WRITTEN IN THE UDC?
YES, IT&apos;S JUST THIS IS REALLY
JUST THE I&apos;LL JUST SAY THE IN
AGREEMENT IT SPELLS OUT THE
ADMINISTRATION OF THE
AFFORDABLE HOUSING I BELIEVE
THAT THIS SECTION REGARDING THE
AFFORDABLE HOUSING PREMIUM HAS
BEEN ACTUALLY REMOVED BY THE
COUNCIL AT THIS POINT IN TIME.
SO I THINK THIS IS ONE OF MAYBE
TWO PROPERTIES THAT WILL HAVE
THIS PARTICULAR AGREEMENT WITH
THIS NUMBER OF AFFORDABLE
HOUSING UNITS.
AND SO AS PART OF THEIR
DEVELOPMENT THEY AGREED TO
PROVIDE TWO UNITS AT AT EIGHTY
PERCENT OF AMAI AND THAT IS
WHAT THEY ARE DOING AND I THINK
WE EVEN HAD A MINIMUM IN THERE
THAT MAY BE SIX HUNDRED SQUARE
FEET AND I THINK THEY DID SOME
RECONFIGURATION OF THE PROPERTY
BUT THESE BUT THESE UNITS ARE
ACTUALLY LARGER OR DIFFERENT
THAN THE OTHER UNITS ONLY
BECAUSE THEY THEY NO LONGER HAD
THAT PRODUCT AVAILABLE BUT THEY
ARE KEEPING AT SIX HUNDRED
SQUARE FEET AS PROMISED TO THE
CITY AS PART OF THE ORIGINAL
REQUIREMENT FOR THE PREMIUM
COUNCILOR ARE THANK YOU.
I&apos;LL I&apos;LL BE VOTING TO APPROVE
THIS BUT I CAN&apos;T LET SOMETHING
FROM THE STANDARD OR LANDMARK
THE COMPANY THAT BUILT IT AND
WE&apos;LL BE MANAGING IT BEFORE
COUNCIL WITHOUT EXPRESSING MY
DEEP DISGUST THAT THEY EMPLOYED
AN ELECTRICAL CONTRACTOR ON THE
PROJECT UNITED ELECTRICAL
CONTRACTORS WHO ARE FACING A
FEDERAL LAWSUIT FROM NINE
FORMER EMPLOYEES FOR OBSCENELY
RACIST BEHAVIORS AND PRACTICES
.
AND IT&apos;S SO DISAPPOINTING TO ME
THAT EVEN AFTER THE STANDARD
LANDMARK WAS INFORMED OF THIS,
THEY STOOD BY THIS COMPANY AND
IT&apos;S MY UNDERSTANDING THAT
THEY&apos;RE USING THEM ON THEIR
NEXT PROJECT.
SO THIS IS WHAT WE&apos;VE AT
HAPPENING IN OUR COMMUNITY AND
IT&apos;S INFURIATING.
COUNCIL MEMBER, I&apos;M SORRY.
THANK YOU.
UM, WELL THIS IS EXTREMELY
DISAPPOINTING THAT UM THAT
MASSIVE STRUCTURE THAT THAT
EXISTS THERE TODAY WHICH WE
APPROVED WHICH I SUPPORTED UM
IN WHICH THIS AGREEMENT IS JUST
A CONTINUATION OF A PRIOR
AGREEMENT AND SO I WILL BE
SUPPORTING IT BECAUSE I BELIEVE
IT&apos;S IMPORTANT WE HONOR OUR
AGREEMENTS THAT WE ENTERED INTO
BUT ALL WE GET IS THIRTEEN
HUNDRED AND TWENTY FIVE SQUARE
FEET OF AFFORDABLE HOUSING.
THAT&apos;S IT.
THIRTEEN HUNDRED AND TWENTY
SQUARE FEET IF YOU WANT TO CALL
IT AFFORDABLE HOUSING ONE
BEDROOM AT TWELVE HUNDRED AND
FIFTY BUCKS A MONTH.
AS I SAID EARLIER WE&apos;RE RLLY
GOOD AT SETTING POLICIES AND
REALLY GOOD AT ACHIEVING OUR
GOALS THIS THANKS TO CITY
ATTORNEY FOR REMINDING ME THAT
WE DID CHANGE OUR PREMIUMS.
UM AND UM TO HAVE A QUESTION
FOR STAFF WHETHER HAS THERE
BEEN ANY DEVELOPERS OR
PROPERTIES THAT HAVE APPLIED
UNDER
THE NEW SET OF UM PREMIUM
STANDARDS THAT WERE ENACTED IN
TWO YEARS TO GO?
UH, IT&apos;S BEEN TWO YEARS AND AT
THAT POINT WE WERE TOLD THAT
WHAT WE DID WAS MADIDI EVEN
MORE DIFFICULT TO DELIVER ON
AFFORDABLE HOUSING UNITS IN THE
D1 D2 AREA UNTIL MY QUESTION IS
HAS ANYBODY TRIED TAKING
ADVANTAGE OF THE PREMIUMS THAT
WERE ADOPTED TWO YEARS AGO?
COUNCIL MEMBER I HONESTLY
CANNOT ANSWER THAT QUESTION.
I THINK SOMEBODY FROM PLANNING
WOULD HAVE TO DO SO AND I&apos;M NOT
SURE THAT ANYONE IS AVAILABLE
NOW AT THIS TIME.
UM, IF IT I DON&apos;T KNOW IF
THAT&apos;S AVAILABLE.
&gt;&gt; I MEAN UM IF NOT I CAN I CAN
ASK THAT QUESTION LATER POINT
BUT IT&apos;S JUST UM IT&apos;S IMPORTANT
WE KNOW WHAT THE RESULTS ARE
FROM FROM FROM OUR ADOPTION
OF THAT POLICY.
AGAIN I THINK WE&apos;VE JUST WALKED
AWAY FROM IT AT THAT POINT AND
HAVEN&apos;T REVISITED I GUESS NO
ONE&apos;S AROUND TO ANSWER THAT
QUESTION.
UM, I WILL I THINK TO THE TO
THE DISCUSS UM MY COLLEAGUE
THAT UM THIS DEVELOPER I THINK
IS GOING TO BE UM AND IS
BUILDING THE NEW UM BUILDING
BEHIND THE COMPUTER SO UM
ANYHOW WE GOT A WHOPPING
THIRTEEN TWENTY FIVE TOTAL
SQUARE FOOTAGE FOR THE
DISCUSSION VOTE PLEASE.
&gt;&gt; COUNCIL COUNCILOR BRITISH
COUNCILOR DASH.
YES COUNCILOR GRISWOLD.
YES THAT&apos;S MY YES
COUNTERPROGRAM.
YES THAT&apos;S OUR DENHA.
YES WE&apos;RE ER YES COUNCILOR ER
YES THAT&apos;S RIGHT NELSON YES
THAT&apos;S OUR RIGS.
YES WE&apos;RE ALLOWING YES FOR
HAYNER NO WASHINGTON DC SIX
RESOLUTION TERMINATING THE
LOCAL STATE OF EMERGENCY IN
RESPONSE TO COVID-19 MOVE BY
COUNCILOR HANASAKI BY COUNCIL
MEMBER NELSON DISCUSSION PLEASE
OF DC SIX COUNCIL MEMBER
HAYNER.
&gt;&gt; YEAH THANK YOU.
THIS IS JUST SORT OF CLEANING
UP SOME LOOSE ENDS.
WE HAD A STATE OF EMERGENCY
DECLARED A WHILE BACK UM IN
RESPONSE TO COVID AND YOU MIGHT
REMEMBER THOSE EARLY DAYS
OF COVID AND THERE WERE A LOT
OF CONCERNS.
NOBODY KNEW WHAT WAS GOING ON
AND WE FELT MAYBE A STATE
OF EMERGENCY.
WE MAY HAVE TO CALL UP ALL
SORTS OF LOCAL AND STATE
RESOURCES AND SO ON.
AND SO I ASK OUR ADMINISTRATOR
TO LOOK INTO HOW THIS STATE
OF EMERGENCY AND THE EMERGENCY
AUTHORITY GRANTED THE MAYOR HAD
BEEN USED EITHER INTERNALLY OR
,YOU KNOW, FACING THE
COMMUNITY AND THEY WERE A
HANDFUL OF WAYS BUT NOTHING
THAT WE CAN&apos;T ACHIEVE NOW
THROUGH POLICY OR VARIOUS
RESOLUTIONS.
AND I JUST ACTUALLY CIRCULATED
TO THE CLERK MINOR CHANGES I
WANT TO STRIKE ONE PART OF ONE
LINE FROM THIS RESOLUTION AND
HOPEFULLY SHE CAN CIRCULATE
THAT POTENTIAL OR THE AMENDMENT
I&apos;M OFFERING UP IF IT&apos;S OK, I
WILL READ IT.
WELL, IT&apos;S BEING CIRCULATED THE
FINAL WHEREAS CLAUSE SAYS THAT
CITY COUNCIL THEREFORE DEEMS IT
PRUDENT TO CONTINUE REQUIRING
VACCINATION OF PERSONS
APPOINTED TO BOARDS AND
COMMISSIONS AND ALLOWING
ELECTRONIC MEETINGS FOR CERTAIN
CITY BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS.
AND I&apos;M GOING TO BE MOVING TO
AMENDMENTS TO STRIKE REQUIRING
A VACCINATION FOR PERSONS
SUPPORTIVE OF BOARDS AND
COMMISSIONS AND ALLOWING I
SHOULD READ WE DEEM IT PRUDENT
TO CONTINUE ELECTRONIC MEETINGS
FOR CERTAIN CITY BOARDS AND
COMMISSIONS.
&gt;&gt; I DON&apos;T I I BELIEVE IN
VARIOUS HEALTH REPORTING
ORGANIZATIONS HAVE SAID THE
SAME THAT PEOPLE IF THEY&apos;RE
VACCINATED THEY&apos;RE NOT GOING TO
VACCINATE.
THEY&apos;VE ALREADY HAD WELL OF A
CHANCE TO DECIDE THAT AND I
DON&apos;T THINK IT&apos;S PRUDENT OR
NECESSARY TO CONTINUE REQUIRING
FOR MEMBERS OF THE PUBLIC WHO
WANT TO SIT ON BOARDS AND
COMMISSIONS.
I MEAN WHERE ARE WE REALLY
CHECKING CARDS AT THE DOOR WE
TALK A LOT AT THIS TABLE AND I
AGREE WITH IT THAT AND IT&apos;S
BEEN ESPECIALLY PREVALENT IN
THE CONCERNS OVER LIKE SAY YOUR
GOVERNOR&apos;S RACE RIGHT NOW THAT
YOU KNOW, WE WANT TO KEEP YOUR
LAWS OFF MY BODY.
RIGHT.
THAT&apos;S WHAT WE ALWAYS USED TO
SAY.
&gt;&gt; AND OF COURSE MANDATING
VACCINES IS THE EXACT OPPOSITE
OF THAT AND SO IT&apos;S NOT A BIG
DEAL BUT I&apos;D LIKE TO STRIKE
THAT LINE.
SO I MOVED TO AMEND MY OH ER A
SECOND TO THAT SECOND I CAN&apos;T
REMEMBER MY DISCUSSION OF THE
AMENDMENT
THE ATTORNEYS OFFICE
HAVE ANY THOUGHTS ABOUT WHETHER
WE SHOULD POSTPONE THIS IN
LIGHT OF THAT PROPOSED
AMENDMENT.
UM THE RESOLUTION IN THE VERY
LAST RESOLVED CLAUSE WILL
CONTINUE TO REQUIRE VACCINATION
AND I DO BELIEVE THAT WE SHOULD
RETAIN THE AUTHORITY TO DO SO.
THAT WOULD BE MY ADVICE.
BUT IN ANY CASE, IF YOU&apos;RE
GOING TO VOTE ON THE AMENDMENT
AND YOU WANT AMEND THE WHEREAS
CLAUSE, YOU SHOULD BE AWARE
THAT THE RESOLUTION THAT
REFERENCE IN THE RESOLVE CLAUSE
WOULD PROBABLY BE INTERPRETED
TO REQUIRE A VACCINATION ANYWAY
.
WELL, I APPRECIATE YOUR ANSWER.
I CERTAINLY UNDERSTAND THAT AND
SO YOU KNOW, THAT&apos;S WHY I WANT
TO CHANGE THE ONE BECAUSE I
DON&apos;T DEEM IT PRUDENT
PERSONALLY SO SO JUST FOR
CLARITY, WHAT I WHAT I HEAR THE
ATTORNEY&apos;S OFFICE SAYING IS
THAT RESOLUTION TWENTY ONE FOR
18 OBLIGATES VACCINATIONS AND
THEREFORE THE REMOVAL FROM THE
WHERE OF THE WHEREAS THE
REMOVAL OF VACCINATION RELATED
LANGUAGE FROM THE WHEREAS
CLAUSES IN THE ATTORNEY&apos;S
OFFICE VIEW IMMATERIAL
THE
ANSWER IS YES.
&gt;&gt; THANK YOU.
IS THAT A FRIENDLY LIMIT?
NO ON THE Q ON THE AMENDMENT
COUNT WHO SHOULD SPEAK
COUNCILOR NELSON ON THE
AMENDMENT TO THE AMENDMENT.
I&apos;M SORRY.
NO THAT&apos;S NOT THE AMENDMENT
THAT&apos;S JUST THE AMENDMENT.
&gt;&gt; COUNCILOR NELSON, I MEAN
FRANKLY I I I I&apos;M GOING TO JUST
MAKE AN ASSUMPTION THAT
PROBABLY EVERYBODY AT THIS
TABLE KNOWS SOMEBODY WHO HAS AN
UNEXPECTED OPINION ABOUT
VACCINATION AND AND IT&apos;S
PUZZLING.
SO I I I DO THINK THAT IT&apos;S NOT
ENTIRELY I I KIND OF HEAR WHAT
COUNCIL MEMBERS ARE SAYING IN
TERMS OF THIS BEEN POLITICIZED
IN A WAY THAT IS WELL AT ANY
RATE IF IT&apos;S NOT IF LEAVING IT
IN IS NOT GOING OR TAKING IT
OUT IS NOT GOING TO HAVE ANY
OPERATIVE EFFECT, I WOULD
RATHER KEEP IT BECAUSE IT IS A
IT IS A STATEMENT OF WHAT I AM
PERFECTLY HAPPY TO STAND BEHIND
AS A BELIEF WHICH IS THAT
VACCINE ACTIONS ARE SOMETHING
THAT WE BELIEVE IN ENOUGH TO
REQUIRE OF OUR BOARD AND
COMMISSION MEMBERS AND AND SO I
I I OPPOSE TAKING IT OUT.
I, I PARTICULARLY INTENTIONALLY
TAKING IT OUT PERHAPS IF IT HAD
NOT BEEN THERE IN THE FIRST
PLACE I WOULD NOT HAVE MADE THE
EFFORT TO ADD BUT AFFIRMATIVELY
TAKING IT OUT I&apos;M NOT WILLING
TO DO FURTHER DISCUSSION.
COUNCIL MEMBER RAMLI IN HAYNER.
&gt;&gt; YEAH I MEAN IT&apos;S GETTING
VERY LATE.
IT&apos;S UNFORTUNATE WE&apos;RE GOING TO
BE GOING INTO CLOSED SESSION TO
TALK ABOUT A VERY IMPORTANT
ISSUE IN AT MIDNIGHT.
THIS ALL TO ME IS KIND OF A
MOOT POINT.
I DO WANT TO TAKE THIS
OPPORTUNITY TO EXPRESS THE
CONCERNS THAT I HAVE ON THE
VACCINE.
I MEAN VACCINATE BOOSTED BUT I
DO KNOW THREE PEOPLE WHO HAVE
HEART PROBLEMS THAT ARE
DIRECTLY RELATED TO VACCINATE
AND SO UM YOU KNOW, I KNOW THIS
BOARD HAS SPOKEN RESOUNDINGLY
AND THEIR POSITION WITH
VACCINATIONS ADULTS AND THREE
PEOPLE WHO HAVE HEART PROBLEMS
BECAUSE OF VACCINATION.
SO DO AS YOU WISH BUT THESE ARE
THE REALITIES.
THANK COUNCIL MEMBER HAYNER.
YEAH, I MEAN I AGREE WITH WHAT
COUNCILWOMAN AND CO-SPONSOR
NELSON SAID I I WANT TO PUT
THAT IN THERE IN THE FIRST
PLACE BUT IT CAME OUT LIKE THAT
IT WAS ALREADY ADDED TO THE
AGENDA.
SO I SUGGESTED THAT I WOULD
MAKE THIS MOTION AT THE TABLE.
I JUST LIKE I SAY I PERSONALLY
DON&apos;T THINK IT&apos;S PRUDENT AND
UNNECESSARY AND YOU MAY RECALL
WHEN ALL THIS BOUNCED AROUND
PRIOR TO US I ASKED TEN
QUESTIONS OF OUR CITY
ATTORNEY&apos;S OFFICE, A PREVIOUS
CITY ATTORNEY&apos;S OFFICE OFFICE
NONETHELESS AND SIX OF THEM
WERE ANSWERED PUBLICLY AND FOUR
OF THEM WERE ANSWERED PRIVATELY
.
&gt;&gt; AND OF COURSE ALL THE GOOD
STUFF WAS IN THE FOUR IT RAN
ANSWERED PRIVATELY AND I&apos;LL
JUST LEAVE IT AT THAT.
AND SO DO WE HAVE THE AUTHORITY
EVEN TO DO THIS?
IT&apos;S STILL A QUESTION FOR THE
COURTS AND HOPEFULLY IT WON&apos;T
COME TO THAT.
SO I JUST I DON&apos;T CARE EITHER
WAY.
&gt;&gt; THE IMPORTANT THING IS THAT
I IT HAS NOT BEEN SHOWN THAT
THERE HAS BEEN ANY EXCELLENT
EFFECT BASED ON THIS LOCAL
STATE OF EMERGENCY
AUTHORIZATION.
AND SO I JUST I JUST FIGURED WE
SHOULD WE SHOULD BE RID OF IT
FOR NOW.
AND WHEN YOU LOOK AT WHAT OTHER
COUNTRIES ARE DOING AND LIKE I
MEAN CANADA IS GETTING RID
OF VACCINATION MANDATES FOR
TRAVELERS AND I WANT TO PUT ONE
EXAMPLE.
YOU KNOW, I JUST DON&apos;T THINK
IT&apos;S NECESSARY ANYMORE THAT WE
WE HOLD A STATE OF EMERGENCY
THAT
THAT&apos;S THE BOTTOM LINE
HERE.
SO I DON&apos;T CARE HOW YOU GO
EITHER WAY ON THIS STUFF.
&gt;&gt; I&apos;M GOING TO VOTE TO REMOVE
IT.
OF COURSE.
I MEAN I&apos;M ROLL-CALL VOTE
PLEASE DON&apos;T COUNT SILVER DISH
BRITISH DISH NO, THAT&apos;S
WORKERS.
WELL NO THAT&apos;S MY SONG.
NO, NO, NO THAT&apos;S MY IDEA.
NO MARY TAYLOR NO FIRE NO
CONCERN ALSO NO MORE BREAKS NOW
BECAUSE WE&apos;RE ALLOWING NO MORE
YES MOTION FAILS OR THE
DISCUSSION THE MOTION HER WELL
THANKS.
&gt;&gt; I JUST AGAIN I WOULD URGE
URGE FOLKS TO CONSIDER PASSING
THIS TO REMOVE AS YOU CAN SEE
BY THE FINAL RESULT CLAUSE YOUR
WISHES TO MANDATE VACCINES FOR
FOLKS ARE STILL IN ORDER AND
YOU KNOW IT&apos;S REALLY SOMETHING
NOT TO SPEAK TO THAT ASPECT
OF IT TOO MUCH LONGER.
BUT I MEAN I I SURELY WOULD
GUESS THAT EVERYONE AT THIS
TABLE KNOWS SOMEONE WHO&apos;S
VACCINATED AND HAS COME DOWN
WITH COVID SO YOU KNOW, IT&apos;S
GOING TO COME IN THE WASH IN
THE FUTURE.
&gt;&gt; WE&apos;LL FIND OUT WHAT WHAT THE
EFFICACY OF THIS DEAL REALLY
WAS.
AND YOU IT&apos;S UNFORTUNATE THAT
YOU THAT IT HAS HAD SUCH AN
OUTSIZE IMPACT ON THE NATION
AND REALLY THE WORLD AND AND
YOU KNOW, IT&apos;S WASHING OUT TO
BE ABOUT A YOU KNOW, LESS THAN
ONE PERCENT OR WHATEVER
FATALITY RATE FOR THIS.
BUT NONETHELESS, IF IT&apos;S IF
IT&apos;S YOUR YOUR DAD OR SOMETHING
THAT&apos;S AT ONE PERCENT IT&apos;S A
IT&apos;S A REAL DEAL.
SO I APPRECIATE EVERYBODY&apos;S
CONSIDERATION FOR THIS.
&gt;&gt; THANK YOU FOR THE DISCUSSION
COUNCIL DISH.
I JUST HAVE A I THINK A QUICK
QUESTION WHICH IS THE
RESOLUTION THAT REMAINS IN
EFFECT BY IS FINAL RESOLVE
CLAUSE DOES IT NEED THE
DECLARATION OF THE STATE
OF EMERGENCY AS A BASIS FOR
THAT POLICY OR HAVE OR DOES
THIS REALLY NOT MAKE REALLY
DOESN&apos;T MAKE A MATERIAL CHANGE
TO OUR PRACTICES?
&gt;&gt; THE RESOLUTION WOULD HAVE
NEEDED THE LOCAL STATE
OF EMERGENCY.
THAT&apos;S WHY WE&apos;RE CARVING IT OUT
AND ASKING YOU TO LEAVE THAT IN
PLACE.
IT WOULD HAVE SUNSET WHEN THE
STATE OF EMERGENCY GETS
TERMINATED, WHICH IS THE REASON
TO CALL IT OUT AND LEAVE IT IN
PLACE.
ROLL CALL THOUGH PLEASE.
STARTING WITH COUNCILOR JUST
REMEMBER RIMAWI AND DRIVES YOU
GUYS CRAZY AND IN OTHERS BUT I
MOVE TO STRIKE THAT LAST
RESOLVE CLAUSE.
&gt;&gt; WHAT IS THERE A SECOND
MOTION TO AMEND FAILS FOR WANT
OF A SECOND FURTHER DISCUSSION
THE MAIN MOTION RAKOVA PLEASE
STARTING WITH COUNCIL NO DISH
MY DISH NO HOUSEWORKER AS WELL
.
&gt;&gt; YES ELSMERE SONG NO MORE
GRAND NO MORE DENHA NO MARY
TAYLOR
NO, THOSE WERE INNOCENT.
YES, BECAUSE OUR BRIGS WE ARE
VOTING THE WHOLE WAY IN NEXT
YEAR.
&gt;&gt; YES, THAT&apos;S AMOUNT YES
BECAUSE OUR HAYNER.
YES MORFIN CARRIES A DC SEVEN
RESOLUTION IN SUPPORT
OF IMPROVED SAFETY BARRIERS
OF PARKING DECKS.
MOVI COUNCIL MEMBER NELSON
SECONDED BY COUNCILMAN HAYNER
DISCUSSION PLEASE OF DC SEVEN
COUNCILMAN NELSON, THANK YOU ON
THE SATURDAY I VISITED SEVERAL
PARKING GARAGES BECAUSE OF OUR
COMMUNITY MEMBER MR. EPSTEIN
WHO IS PARTICULARLY CONCERNED
ABOUT THIS ISSUE AND CARES
ABOUT THE DANGER OF FOLKS WHO
ARE IN A TOUGH STATE OF MIND A
TEMPORARY STATE OF MIND AND ARE
FINDING AN OPPORTUNITY TO HURT
THEMSELVES THAT OUR PARKING X.
I HAVE NOT BEEN FOLLOWING THIS
ISSUE CLOSELY.
I&apos;M GRATEFUL FOR COMMUNITY
MEMBERS WHO EDUCATE ME ABOUT
ISSUES LIKE THIS ONE, MR.
ECKSTEIN THAT I VISITED PARKING
DECKS AND LOOKED AT LOCATIONS
WHERE PEOPLE HAD PREVIOUSLY
FALLEN OR JUMPED ONE LOCATION I
CAN&apos;T REMEMBER WHICH TICKET WAS
AT.
HE WAS VERY ALARMED TO NOTICE
THAT I LOOK IN OLD PHOTOGRAPHS
THAT HE HAD FROM SEVERAL YEARS
AGO AND SEE THAT THE CONDITIONS
HAD NOT BEEN IMPROVED.
I DO APPRECIATE THAT WE HAVE A
LOT OF ISSUES THAT WE ARE
BALANCING NOW BUT I THIS
RESOLUTION IS IS BASICALLY
URGING AND ASKING THE D.C. D.A.
TO FOLLOW THROUGH WITH
ACTIVITIES THAT WE SORT OF WE
ASK THEM TO PURSUE ALREADY IN
TWENTY SEVENTEEN I SAW WITH MY
OWN EYES LIKE WE HAVE CHAIN
LINK FENCING ON ROOFTOPS THAT
DON&apos;T HAVE ANYTHING ATOP THEM.
IF I WAS A BIT YOUNGER AND
FITTER I I CAN SEE MYSELF
CLIMBING OVER THOSE FENCES
QUITE EASILY.
THEY ARE A DANGER TO HAZARD AND
THIS IS AN OPPORTUNITY FOR US
TO PROTECT MEMBERS OF OUR
COMMUNITY.
LIKE I SAID, IT&apos;S JUST A
RESOLUTION URGING THE D.A. TO
TAKE STEPS AND LOOK AT THIS
PROBLEM SERIOUSLY.
&gt;&gt; I HOPE EVERYBODY CAN SUPPORT
IT.
COUNCIL MEMBER HAYNER, THANKS.
&gt;&gt; WHEN YOU LOOK AT WHAT
HAPPENED LAST TIME, THEY
BASICALLY WE HAD CHANGE CHANGES
IN THE BIDDING ENVIRONMENT AND
GREAT DISCREPANT BETWEEN OUR
IN-HOUSE ESTIMATIONS AND THE
CONTRACTS THAT CAME BACK IN
RESPONSE TO THE REQUEST FOR
PROPOSALS KIND OF SHELVED THIS
AND SO THEY SORT DID SOMETHING
IT WASN&apos;T.
SADLY IT WASN&apos;T ENOUGH AND
THERE MAY HAVE BEEN LOST
OPPORTUNITIES IN THERE AS
PRICES CHANGE.
I WISH IT WOULD HAVE BEEN
CONSTANTLY BEING LOOKED AT AND
I CAN&apos;T LET IT GO BY WITHOUT
SAYING THAT, YOU KNOW, THE
MILLION DOLLARS SET ASIDE THAT
I WANTED FOR OUR FUNDS WOULD
HAVE BEEN PERFECT FOR THIS
BECAUSE IT&apos;S CLEAR THAT THE
PANDEMIC HAS AFFECTED PEOPLE IN
IN IN WAYS THAT ARE YOU KNOW,
COULD VERY WELL BE TIED TO THIS
TYPE OF THING.
AND SO BUT THAT YOU KNOW, THE
D.A. HAS HAD SOME CASH.
THEY&apos;VE LOST SOME MONEY WITH
THE LAST PARKING OVER THE LAST
COUPLE OF YEARS AND SO ON.
BUT I THINK THAT I THINK IT&apos;S
RIGHT AND TO ASK THEM TO PLEASE
GET TOGETHER IF WE&apos;RE GOING TO
LEAVE THOSE STRUCTURES
DOWNTOWN, IF THEY&apos;RE GOING TO
BE PARKING, IF THEY&apos;RE GOING TO
BE ACCESSIBLE TO PEOPLE ON FOOT
OR IN CAR THAT THEY NEED TO BE
MADE WHOLLY SAFE AND YOU KNOW,
LET&apos;S NOT HAVE TO ASK A THIRD
TIME I GUESS IS WHAT I WAS
THINKING WHEN I ASKED TO
CO-SPONSOR THIS SO THANK YOU
FOR YOUR CONSIDERATION AND FOR
PUTTING THIS TOGETHER
FOLLOWING
UH, THANKS.
&gt;&gt; UM YEAH.
THANKS FOR TOUCHING UPON THE
FACT THAT UM THE PANDEMIC IS
EXASPERATED UNDERLYING
CONDITIONS THAT EXISTED FOR
MANY PEOPLE SUFFERING FROM
MENTAL HEALTH AND WE&apos;RE SEEING
AN UPTICK UNFORTUNATELY AND
PREVENTABLE DEATHS AND SUICIDE
AND OTHERS WE DID ADDRESS THIS
AS AS A CITY MANY, MANY YEARS
AGO THE COST OF HAVING A BETTER
SOLUTION LIKE WE SEE IN GRAND
RAPIDS WAS WAS PASSED BECAUSE
OF THE COSTS AND THE TIMETABLE
TO INSTALL IT.
MANY, MANY, MANY YEARS HAVE
GONE BY AND UNFORTUNATELY FEW
SOULS HAVE TO HAVE TAKEN THEIR
LIVES OFF THE PARKING X.
&gt;&gt; I THINK IT&apos;S TIME FOR US TO
ACT AND WE KNOW THAT AS OTHERS
HAVE STATED, PROFESSIONALS THAT
THIS IS AN IMPULSIVE MANY TIMES
AND WE NEED TO DO WHAT&apos;S RIGHT
IF IN MANY OBVIOUSLY IN THE
RIGHT WAY CONCERNED WITH
TRAFFIC FATALITIES AND OTHER
DEATHS IN OUR COMMUNITY, WE ARE
WILLING TO SPEND MILLIONS
OF DOLLARS TO PREVENT THOSE.
WE SHOULD BE WILLING TO SPEND A
MILLION DOLLARS ON OUR PARKING
GARAGES TO PREVENT THESE THESE
DEATHS FROM OCCURRING.
SO I HOPE THE D.A. IS LISTENING
AND I HOPE THE D.A. TAKES
ACTION AND FINALLY PUTS THE
RIGHT RESOURCES TO INSTALL THE
INFRASTRUCTURE THAT NEEDS TO BE
UP THERE AND QUITE FRANKLY
SHOULD HAVE BEEN UP THERE BY
NOW.
&gt;&gt; THANKS CARL ZIMMER DISH.
I DON&apos;T KNOW THE HISTORY OF THE
NEGOTIATIONS WITH THE DENHA AND
I AM AS I CAN&apos;T IMAGINE HOW IT
FEELS TO BE THE FAMILY OF OF
SOMEONE WHO MAKES A JUMP THAT
IS EITHER FATAL OR TERRIBLY
DISABLING.
I AM JUST A LITTLE I JUST WOULD
LIKE A LITTLE BIT MORE DETAIL
ABOUT WHAT WOULD BE THE COST
AND WHERE THE BUDGET COME FROM.
SO IT&apos;S IT&apos;S ONE THING TO SAY
WE SHOULD DO THIS AND THE THEY
SHOULD PAY FOR IT WITHOUT
TALKING TO THEM AND IF I JUST
I&apos;M HAPPY TO BE TOLD THAT THAT
SHOULDN&apos;T BE A CONSIDERATION
AND WE CAN GO AHEAD AND VOTE ON
THIS BECAUSE IT&apos;S AN IMPORTANT
AND STRONG SIGNAL.
BUT IT BUT THE RESOLVE CLAUSE
DOES SAY THAT WE URGE THEM TO
ACT SO WE&apos;RE NOT IT&apos;S IT&apos;S
URGING THEM TO ACT BUT BUT WE
CAN&apos;T FORCE THEM BACK.
I MEAN COULD SOMEONE
INTERPRET
THE RESULT CLAUSE FOR ME THAT I
WOULD FIND THAT HELPFUL JUST SO
THAT I UNDERSTAND WHAT I&apos;M
VOTING ON BECAUSE I&apos;M OFTEN
WHEN WE DO SOMETHING LIKE THIS
THERE&apos;S A BUDGETARY AMOUNT
ATTACHED AND THERE ISN&apos;T ONE
HERE.
SO I&apos;M JUST ASKING FOR
CLARIFICATION.
THIS IS AFFECTING ANY OUTREACH
TODAY ABOUT WHAT THIS WOULD
ENTAIL.
&gt;&gt; A QUESTION FOR ME THIS ABOUT
THIS IS THIS IS THIS IS JUST
MAKING A COMMUNICATION TO THEM.
WE WE PASS RESOLUTIONS LIKE
THIS A LOT AND IT IT HOPEFULLY
WILL PROMPT A DISCUSSION AROUND
THE QUESTIONS THAT YOU&apos;RE
RAISING AND HAD I HAD I PROPOSE
A FUNDING MECHANISM WITHOUT IT
GOING THROUGH AN ACTUAL PROCESS
WITH THE ORGANIZATION THAT
WOULD BE PROBLEMATIC THIS
DELEGATING TO THE CITY
ADMINISTRATOR TO HAVE THE
APPROPRIATE CONVERSATION AROUND
ALL OF THOSE QUESTIONS.
&gt;&gt; I COUNCILMAN GRANT, THANK
YOU.
I WAS PART OF COUNCIL ON TWENTY
SEVENTEEN WHEN WE UNANIMOUSLY
PASSED THAT RESOLUTION AND IT I
WENT BACK AND TOOK A LOOK AT IT
OVER THE WEEKEND AND SO YEAH
AND AND YOU KNOW I I DO
UNDERSTAND WHY THERE ARE SOME
QUESTIONS ARE ON THE TABLE
BECAUSE THAT TWENTY SEVENTEEN
RESOLUTION HAD MORE CLARITY IT
HAD IT HAD REVIEW FROM STAFF
AND I&apos;M ASSUMING LEGAL SO I I
TRULY APPRECIATE THE INTENT
OF THIS RESOLUTION BUT I DO
FIND SOME OF THE LANGUAGE A
LITTLE FUZZY IN TERMS OF YOU
KNOW FOR EXAMPLE ANYTHING THAT
COULD RESULT IN SERIOUS INJURY.
SO I WOULD I WOULD REALLY LIKE
TO HEAR FROM THE DDA AND I&apos;M
HEARING FROM ONE OF THE
SPONSORS THE INTENT IS TO HAVE
THE CITY ADMINISTRATOR WORK
WITH THE DDA AND AND DO THIS
WORK.
&gt;&gt; BUT THE RESOLUTION DOESN&apos;T
ACTUALLY SAY THAT.
SO I WOULD PROPOSE TO TO MOVE
TO REFER THIS TO THE DEA AND
HAVE THEM COME BACK TO COUNCIL
WITH A REPORT AT DATE CERTAIN
AND I WOULD LOOK TO STAFF TO
GIVE US A DATE FOR THAT.
&gt;&gt; I BELIEVE THE DEA DIRECTOR
IS ON ZOM AND COUNCIL MEMBERS
ALL THIS WATSON, THE EXECUTIVE
DIRECTOR OF THE DEA ALL FIRST
LET ME SAY THAT THAT WE ARE
VERY SORRY FOR THE FAMILY AND
ARE VERY CONCERNED ABOUT THIS
ISSUE AND I JUST WANT TO LET
YOU KNOW THAT FROM REALLY THE
MOTIVE THAT WE HEARD ABOUT IT
WE BEGAN TO TALK ABOUT WHAT ARE
THE OPTIONS AND WHAT&apos;S THE
SITUATION AND SO WE&apos;VE ALREADY
BEGUN TO HAVE CONVERSATIONS
AROUND EXPLORING OPTIONS TO I
GUESS ENHANCE THE DETERRENT ON
ALL OF THE PARKING GARAGES AND
SO WE APPRECIATE COUNCIL&apos;S
INTEREST IN AND ARE ALREADY
ENGAGED AT LEAST WITH STAFF
LEVEL IN CONVERSATIONS AND WILL
BE ENGAGED IN CONVERSATIONS
WITH THE DDA BOARD
IF I CAN
INTERRUPT THE CHAIRMAN ACCUSED
MR. MR. WATSON, DO I INFER THEN
HAPPILY THAT IN EFFECT D.A.
BELIEVES IT&apos;S ALREADY AND I&apos;M
HAPPY TO PASS THE RESOLUTION IF
THIS IS THE CASE BUT
ESSENTIALLY IS ALREADY UNDERWAY
DOING THE THINGS THAT THE
RESOLVE CLAUSE REQUESTS THAT IS
CORRECT, YES.
OK, I&apos;M HAPPY TO SUPPORT IT ON
THAT BASIS.
I&apos;VE GOT COUNCIL MEMBER SONG
DAN GAINOR.
I WAS JUST POINTING TO COUNCIL
MEMBER GRANT HOW I ALSO HAVE
THE TWENTY RESOLUTION UP AT THE
SAME TIME AND THAT THAT
RESOLUTION ENDS WITH THAT
RESOLVED THAT THE CURRENT
YEAR&apos;S BUDGET DOES NOT PERMIT
IMMEDIATE ACTION BUT THE CITY
COUNCIL REQUESTS THAT THE CITY
ADMINISTRATOR DISCUSS WITH THE
D.A. ALTERNATE SOURCES
OF FUNDING.
SO I ASSUME THAT THOSE
EXPECTATIONS OF OUR CITY
ADMINISTRATOR ARE STILL IN
PLACE IF WE&apos;RE TALKING ABOUT
TRYING TO FIGURE OUT WHAT
POTENTIAL FUNDING WHERE WE CAN
FIND ALTERNATIVE FUNDING TO
SUPPORT ONGOING ONGOING NEEDS
OR ONGOING RESPONSE IS THAT
CORRECT ME I SHOULD ASK THE
CITY ADMINISTRATOR
I&apos;M SORRY
THIS IS FROM THE TWENTY
SEVENTEEN RESOLUTION THAT THE
RESOLUTION WE&apos;RE DISCUSSING IS
REFERRING TO.
&gt;&gt; SO IS THAT STILL IF I CAN
JUST JUMP IN BRIEFLY I BELIEVE
THE LANGUAGE OF THAT REFERS TO
A SPECIFIC FISCAL SPECIFIC YEAR
.
&gt;&gt; OK BUT NOT TO THAT NOT TO
THAT SPECIFIC RESOLUTION.
&gt;&gt; CORRECT.
BUT SINCE THAT WAS PASSED IN
2017 IT STILL REFERS TO 2017 OR
2018 FOR THAT YEAR RATHER THAN
AN ONGOING ENGAGEMENT.
&gt;&gt; OK, THANK YOU COUNCILMAN
TRAINOR AND I&apos;M SORRY.
&gt;&gt; WELL, I WANT TO THANK MR.
WATSON FOR STAYING UP LATE TO
COMMENT ON THIS AND I
APPRECIATE IT.
I HAVE NO DOUBT THAT YOU GUYS
IMMEDIATELY SAW THE PROBLEMS
THAT WE&apos;RE HAVING HERE AND ARE
HOPEFULLY SEEKING SOLUTIONS.
SO AND I ALSO APPRECIATE THE
MAYOR SUGGESTING THAT HE WOULD
SUPPORT ON THAT NOTION ALONE
AND I AGREE WITH THAT.
I THINK IT&apos;S A RIGHT THAT WE
SAY HEY, WE CARE ABOUT THIS AND
WE&apos;RE ASKING YOU PLEASE TO DO
SOMETHING.
I ALSO CAN&apos;T LET IT SLIP BY
WITHOUT SUGGESTING THAT
REMINDING EVERYONE THAT WE
WAIVE THE OPPORTUNITY FOR AN
ENGAGED CONVERSATION ON THIS.
&gt;&gt; WHEN WE PASSED ON OUR ANNUAL
PARKING MEETING WITH THE MOST
RECENTLY, THIS SURELY WOULD
HAVE BEEN A TOPIC TO DISCUSS
WHEN WE DISCUSSED THE PARKING
AGREEMENTS WITH THE D.A. AND SO
THERE IS HERE&apos;S AN UNFORTUNATE
INSTANCE OF WE CEDED OUR
AUTHORITY AND NOW WE&apos;RE HAVING
TO TAKE A LITTLE BACK AND I
WOULD FINALLY SUGGEST THAT OUR
FUNDING MAY INDEED PRODUCE AT
LEAST A PARTIAL DONATION TO
THIS CAUSE.
THANK YOU, COUNCIL MEMBER.
&gt;&gt; SIMILARLY, PERHAPS WE CAN
VOTE ON THE YOU KNOW, NOT JUST
MADE WE WERE SAID TO HAVE A
COLLABORATIVE MEETING THIS
MONTH WITH THE D.A. TO DISCUSS
SHARED INTEREST.
WE DID NOT TAKE ADVANTAGE
OF THAT OPPORTUNITY AND YOU
KNOW, IT&apos;S SO WEIRD HEARING
SOME MEMBERS OF COUNCIL WHO AT
TIMES BECOME FISCAL
CONSERVATIVE AND AT OTHER TIMES
HAVE NO PROBLEM SPENDING MONEY
ON ACCOUNTABLY.
&gt;&gt; I&apos;VE SEEN THE DENHA SPEND
MILLION OF DOLLARS AND THINGS
THAT ARE OUTDATED OR SOMETHING
THAT WAS MORE BROADLY SUPPORTED
PERHAPS UM I MEAN WE SPENT A
MILLION DOLLARS AND WE WERE
SIGNS TEN YEARS AGO IN THE
LIGHT IN THE AGE OF CHEAP.
YES.
WE SPEND I DON&apos;T KNOW I&apos;M
GUESSING FOUR TO SIX MILLION
DOLLARS IN THE RECENT YEARS AND
BIKE LANES SO THE MONEY&apos;S
THERE.
IT&apos;S WHETHER WE WANT TO MAKE IT
A PRIORITY.
&gt;&gt; THAT&apos;S ALL FOR THE
DISCUSSION.
CONTROVERSAL.
I LIKE TO KNOW HOW THIS IS A
SMALL COMMUNITY AND WHEN THESE
INCIDENTS INCIDENCES HAPPEN I
KNOW AND FOLKS WHO WORK ARE
ACTIVELY WORKING AND BETTERING
MENTAL HEALTH CONDITIONS AND
POLICIES AND PROGRAMS FOR KIDS
AND ADULTS STRUGGLING WITH
MENTAL HEALTH, IT&apos;S SEASONAL.
WE&apos;LL WE&apos;VE SEEN THIS WE&apos;VE
SEEN COUNTY THE COUNTY HAS
PRESENTED A PRESENTATION THIS
YEARS AGO WHEN WE HAD A SPATE
OF TEEN SUICIDES.
I JUST WANT TO NOTE THAT WHEN
WE GET THESE CALLS AND NOTICES
THAT THESE ARE PEOPLE IN OUR
COMMUNITY, MY FRIENDS WERE
IMMEDIATELY ABLE TO NAME THE
FAMILY AND I HOPE THAT YOU
KNOW, I APPRECIATE OUR DEA
DIRECTOR BEGINNING THIS
CONVERSATION SHARING HIS
CONDOLENCES FIRST SO WE MIGHT
BE REFERENCING BUDGETING OUT
OF CONCERN AND OUT OF JUST
TRYING TO SEE IF WE CAN COME
BACK TO THESE FAMILIES AND SAY,
YOU KNOW, IT WAS IT WAS AN
EFFORT WHEN THE BIGGER DILEMMA
IS NOT JUST THE PANDEMIC BUT
THE UNDERFUNDING OF MENTAL
HEALTH PROGRAMS SERVICES SINCE
ENGLER&apos;S SO I MEAN WE COULD GO
BACK AND WE KNOW THE DEPTH
OF THE NEED IN THIS COMMUNITY
SO I JUST DON&apos;T WANT TO MAKE I
JUST WANT TO MAKE SURE THAT
THIS IS NOT ON THE COMMENTS
FOLLOWING UP ON THIS ARE NOT
UNSERIOUS OR NOT COMPASSIONATE.
&gt;&gt; THANKS FOR THE DISCUSSION ON
FAVOR POST IT&apos;S APPROVED.
DO YOU HAVE A CLOSED SESSION
TODAY
?
I RECOGNIZE THAT IT&apos;S PAST
MIDNIGHT BUT I&apos;M ASKING YOU TO
PLEASE INDULGE ME.
I AM REQUESTING A CLOSED
SESSION UNDER FCL FIFTEEN POINT
SIX TO EIGHT E TO DISCUSS
PENDING LITIGATION.
THE CASE IS ATTORNEY GENERAL AT
ALL AND CITY OF EMBER AT ALL AS
INTERVENERS VERSUS GELLMAN&apos;S I
INSIST COURT OF APPEALS NUMBER
THREE FIVE SEVEN FIVE NINE NINE
WASHTENAW COUNTY CIRCUIT
COURT
NUMBER EIGHT EIGHT THREE FOUR
SEVEN THREE FOUR DASH C I&apos;M
REQUESTING YOU INDULGENCE
BECAUSE SOME DEADLINES ARE
COMING UP AND I NEED YOUR
GUIDANCE.
I HAVE A MOTION PLEASE TO GO
INTO CLOSED SESSION ON THAT
BASIS MOVE BY COUNSEL HER
SECOND ACCOUNT NUMBER DIS
DISCUSSION ROLL CALL VOTE
ABSENT COUNCILMAN.
YES.
JUST FOR FUTURE REFERENCE WE
HAVE A COUNCIL RULE COUNCIL
SHALL STRIVE TO DISCUSS COMPLEX
LITIGATION MATTERS DURING
SPECIAL SESSIONS.
IT&apos;S ON SECTION FIVE APJ JUST
FOR FOR FUTURE PLANNING
PURPOSES.
THANK YOU RAKOVA.
PLEASE TURN TO COUNCIL ON
BRITISH SMARTISH.
&gt;&gt; YES YES YES YES YES YES YES
MARIAH YES AND ALSO YES YES
THAT&apos;S NORMAL.
YES THAT&apos;S HAYNER.
&gt;&gt; YES WATCHING CARS.
ALL RIGHT.
WE&apos;RE IN CLOSED SESSION
UPSTAIRS
NOW EMOTIONAL PLEAS TO
GO BACK INTO OPEN SESSION MOVE
BY COUNCILOR GRANT SECOND BY
SOME BRITISH DISCUSSION ON
FAVOR POSED.
WE ARE BACK IN OPEN SESSION
KIND OF EMOTION TO PROVE THAT
WE HAVE A FORCE TO SUPPORT MOVE
IN MOTION TO APPROVE THE
SUPPORT MOVE BY COUNCILOR
SECONDED BY COUNCIL MEMBER GLEN
DISCUSSION TO CLERK REPORT ON
FAVOR PROPOSED CLERK SUPPORT AS
APPROVED.
&gt;&gt; DO WE HAVE COMMUNICATIONS
TODAY FROM INDOMITABLE CITY
ATTORNEY?
&gt;&gt; I JUST I BELIEVE HAVE
REPORTED THIS BY EMAIL BUT I
JUST WANTED TO TAKE A SECOND TO
SAY THANK YOU FOR THE
OPPORTUNITY TO FILE THE AMICUS
BRIEF IN THE SUPREME COURT IN
SUPPORT OF GOVERNOR WHITMAN&apos;S
CASE.
&gt;&gt; THAT BRIEF HAS BEEN FILED
AND WE WILL BE WATCHING THE
CASE TO KEEP YOU UPDATED.
&gt;&gt; THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
WE ARE GOING TO PUBLIC COMMENT,
GENERAL TIME, PUBLIC COMMENT,
GENERAL TIME IS AN OPPORTUNITY
FOR MEMBERS OF THE PUBLIC TO
SPEAK TO COUNCIL AND THE
COMMUNITY ABOUT MATTERS
OF MUNICIPAL INTEREST TO SPEAK
OF PUBLIC COMMENT GENERAL TIME
ONE NEED NOT HAVE SIGNED UP IN
ADVANCE BECAUSE OF THREE
MINUTES IN WHICH TO SPEAK.
&gt;&gt; SO PLEASE PAY CLOSE
ATTENTION TO THE TIME A CLERK
WILL NOTIFY YOU IN THIRTY
SECONDS REMAINING AND WHEN YOUR
TIME HAS EXPIRED WHEN YOUR TIME
HAS EXPIRED PLEASE CONCLUDING
REMARKS AND CEDE THE FLOOR.
IS THERE ANYONE WHO&apos;D LIKE TO
SPEAK AT PUBLIC COMMENT?
IS BUJJI THERE ANYONE ONLINE
WHO WOULD LIKE TO SPEAK AT
PUBLIC COMMENT?
&gt;&gt; YES WE HAVE A CALLER ON LINE
WHO IS VSQUEZ?
YOU HAVE A COMMENT?
YES, GREETINGS.
CITY COUNCIL AND JUST A BRIEF
COMMENT.
YOU KNOW MUCH OF WHAT WE&apos;VE
BEEN SEEING ON NEEDS TO BE
LOOKED AT IN TERMS OF MAKING
SURE THAT EVERYBODY CAN YOU
KNOW, EXPAND THE OPPORTUNITIES
AFFORDED TO US IN TERMS
OF INCREASING THE NUMBER
OF PEOPLE WHO CAN LIVE HERE IN
THE INNER HARBOR.
SO YOU KNOW, GOING FORWARD
ENCOURAGING OF COURSE AS A
CITIZEN JUST YOU KNOW, LET&apos;S
KEEP PUSHING FORWARD IN TERMS
OF WHAT WE CAN DO TO INCREASE
THE NUMBER OF HOUSING UNITS
WHERE PEOPLE CAN ACTUALLY LIVE
AND MAXIMIZING THAT.
YOU KNOW, I WOULD LOVE TO MAKE
A FOURPLEX OUT OF MY PROPERTY
ON PONTIAC TRIL YOU KNOW I
MEAN, YOU KNOW, THAT&apos;S THE KIND
OF THING THAT I THINK WE SHOULD
BE LOOKING AT AND ENCOURAGING
AND PUSHING FORWARD ON.
&gt;&gt; THANK YOU FOR YOUR TIME.
GOOD NIGHT.
THANK YOU
.
CALLER ON THE PHONE.
I&apos;M RUNNING IN FIVE, FIVE SIX.
DO YOU HAVE A COMMENT?
&gt;&gt; HELLO AGAIN.
&gt;&gt; CAN YOU HEAR ME?
YES WE GO.
&gt;&gt; HI IT&apos;S LATE AND MAYBE ALL
OF US ARE BURNED BUT I THINK
THERE&apos;S A COUPLE OF THINGS THAT
I&apos;M VERY PUZZLED BY IN THE
DISCUSSION OF THE GC ONE.
&gt;&gt; THE FIRST IS ON THE SAFETY
ISSUE THE SAFE PLAN TRIANGLE
AND ALL OF THE THIS SEEMS TO BE
PRESENTED TONIGHT IS THIS IS A
SIMPLE SOLUTION AND SO ON.
&gt;&gt; I&apos;M VERY, VERY PUZZLED WHY
IN THE PLANNING COMMISSION
MEETING WHICH THAT WAS
DISCUSSED FOR AN HOUR NOBODY
NOT A STAFF PERSON AND NONE
OF THE PLANNING COMMISSIONERS
EVEN RAISED POSSIBILITY TO
SOLVE THAT SERIOUS ISSUE THAT
COMMISSIONER BRANDELL RAISED.
AND THEN IN THE FIRST THREE
MINUTES OF THE MEETING THE
FOLLOWING NOBODY RAISED IT
EITHER AND NOW IT&apos;S LIKE OH,
THIS IS SIMPLE.
IT&apos;LL JUST BE DONE AT THE SITE
PLAN APPROVAL.
THESE ARE THE PEOPLE THAT ARE
DOING THAT AND THEY DIDN&apos;T EVEN
SEEM TO KNOW THAT WAS A
POSSIBILITY FOR BETTER PART
OF TWO MEETINGS.
THAT&apos;S SHOCKING TO ME.
NO ONE NUMBER TWO IS JUST AS
ARGUMENT THAT SINCE WE CAN
ALREADY DO TWENTY FIVE PERCENT
OR WE&apos;RE ONLY DOING TWENTY FIVE
PERCENT ON SOME OF THESE
PARCELS
BUT WHY WOULD ANYTHING
HAPPEN?
TWO POINTS.
ONE IS
THAT ASSUMES RIGHT NOW
THAT THEY COULD DO FOUR TIMES
WHAT&apos;S THERE RIGHT NOW AFTER
THIS REZONING IT&apos;LL BE EIGHT
TIMES THROUGH TWENTY EIGHT
TIMES TWENTY EIGHT TIMES WHAT
THAT&apos;S ON PERSONAL NOW AND YOU
THINK THAT&apos;S AN INCENTIVE.
OK, BRAD IF IT&apos;S NOT AN
INCENTIVE HOW ARE YOU HOW IS
ANY MORE HOUSING GOING TO BE
BUILT?
IN OTHER WORDS, IF IT&apos;S NOT
INCENTIVE WHAT ARE YOU DOING
THIS FOR?
YOU&apos;RE NOT GOING TO GET ANY
HOUSING IF IT&apos;S NOT AN
INCENTIVE BEYOND THOSE FEW
VACANT SITES AND THE OTHER
SITES.
&gt;&gt; I UNDERSTAND YOU THINK THERE
MIGHT BE INFO ON THESE SHOPPING
CENTERS THAT IS NOT GOING TO
HAPPEN UNLOU WORK WITH THE
SHOPPING CENTER OWNERS LIKE
BRICKS OR THAT YOU JUST KICKED
IN THE TEETH THE ARE OBJECTING
ON THE SAME GROUNDS THAT I
RAISED THAT IT WOULD MESS UP
THEIR LEASES, IT WOULD MESS UP
THEIR THEIR POTENTIAL ADDITIONS
AND EXPANSION AND HOW THEY RUN
THEIR BUSINESS AND NOBODY LIKES
THE MODELS THAT WERE BUILT IN
THE FIFTIES BECAUSE THEY&apos;RE YOU
CAN&apos;T REPLACE THEM.
THEY&apos;RE NOT GOING TO MAGICALLY
BE TURNED INTO HOUSING WITHOUT
WORKING WITH THEM.
&gt;&gt; IT IT&apos;S JUST AMAZING TO ME
THAT WE&apos;RE JUST DENYING REALITY
HERE.
&gt;&gt; THAT&apos;S ALL I HAVE FOR
TONIGHT.
I&apos;LL PROBABLY WRITE SOMETHING
ELSE BECAUSE THERE&apos;S A LOT MORE
TO IT BUT YOU HAVE TO DEAL WITH
REALITY.
THANK GOOD NIGHT.
&gt;&gt; THANK YOU
.
CALLER WITH THE PHONE NUMBER
AND FOUR EIGHT SIX DO YOU HAVE
A COMMENT OR STAR SECOND ON
YOUR GO AHEAD.
&gt;&gt; GOOD EVENING.
YOUR CAMPAIGN A CONSTITUENT THE
THIRD WARD I&apos;M CALLING IN
REFERENCE TO THE INFORMATION
RELEASED BY THE WHITE HOUSE NOT
COUNTING HELP APARTMENT INFANT
MORTALITY RATE IS ONE OF THE
MOST WIDELY USED MEASURES
OF THE OVERALL HEALTH STATUS
OF A COMMUNITY LEADING MEMBERS
OF THE DISCREPANCIES BETWEEN
THE OVERALL INFANT MORTALITY
RATE AND SPECIFICALLY FOR THE
AFRICAN-AMERICAN INFANT
MORTALITY RATE HAS BEEN LIFTED.
I&apos;D LIKE TO KNOW WHAT AMOUNT
OF RESPONSIBILITY THE CITY
COUNCIL TAKES FOR THESE NUMBERS
AFTER REPEATED INSTANCES
OF RACISM IN CITY HALL
EUROCRACY WITH LASCARIS WITH
CHIEF WITH TWO COPS SAYING FOR
RACIAL DISCRIMINATION THE LIST
GOES ON AND ON.
HOW MUCH HAVE YOU SPENT IN
RACIAL DISCRIMINATION LAWSUITS
?
IT&apos;S TIME TO SPEND SOME MONEY
ON RECREATION.
IT&apos;S TIME TO STAND UP AND THINK
ABOUT SOME LIKE WASHINGTON D
DOESN&apos;T GET YOU OFF THE HOOK.
YOU NEED TO STEP UP AND BUILD
SOME AFFORDABLE HOUSING, GET
RID OF YOUR LUXURIOUS GOLF
COURSES AND BUILD SOME HOUSING
.
&gt;&gt; THANK YOU FOR YOUR TIME.
THANK YOU.
&gt;&gt; I DON&apos;T HAVE ANY OTHER
CALLERS ON THE LINE WITH THEIR
HANDS UP SEEING NO ONE.
&gt;&gt; PUBLIC COMMENTS CLOSE THEIR
COMMUNICATIONS TODAY FROM
COUNCIL COUNCILMAN GRISWOLD.
I JUST WANT TO CLARIFY BASED ON
SOME STATEMENTS THAT WERE MADE
FOR THE RESOLUTION THAT I
INTRODUCED FOR NONPARTIZAN
ELECTIONS, THE REASON I
INTRODUCED THIS AND I DID NOT
EXPECT IT TO PASS WAS THAT AT
LEAST SIX DIFFERENT PEOPLE HAVE
ASKED ME ABOUT STARTING A
PETITION CAMPAIGN AND I SAID
BEFORE WE DO THAT, LET&apos;S TAKE
IT TO CITY COUNCIL AND WE&apos;LL
GET ALL THE LANGUAGE UPDATED
AND EVEN THOUGH IT PROBABLY
WON&apos;T PASS, WE&apos;LL BE READY FOR
THE PETITION CAMPAIGN SO THAT
THAT WAS MY MOTIVE THERE AND I
APOWER JEYES FOR THE LENGTHY
DISCUSSION TONIGHT THAT WAS NOT
MY INTENT AT ALL.
THANK FOR THE COMMUNICATIONS
COUNCIL OVER HAYNER.
WE JUST CAME OUT OF A CLOSED
SESSION ON VOGELMAN AND
OF COURSE THE GOVERNMENT
MATTERS KIND OF DEAR TO MY
HEART AND I KNOW I GUESS ONE
OF THE THINGS THAT GOT ME
INTERESTED IN POLITICS IN THE
FIRST PLACE TO HOPEFULLY HAVE A
SEAT AT THIS TABLE WHEN WE
COULD MAKE SOME CHANGES TO
THAT.
AND I THINK WE HAVE HAD SOME
PROGRESS AND YOU KNOW, I&apos;M AS
HOPEFUL AS I CAN BE IN THE FACE
OF A GIANT MULTINATIONAL
CORPORATION FIGHTING US IN
COURT EVERY BIT OF THE WAY
SOMETIMES TAKE YOU KNOW, THAT&apos;S
THAT&apos;S PROBABLY MY BIGGEST
DISAPPOINTMENT AND IT ALMOST
MADE ME WANT TO RUN AGAIN SO
THAT I COULD STAY INVOLVED IN
THAT PROJECT.
SOMETIMES I TAKE LITTLE NOTES
WHEN WE&apos;RE MEETING ABOUT THINGS
I WANTED TO SAY AND YOU KNOW,
WE HAVE SOME COMPLAINTS ABOUT
ALL ELECTRIC BUILDINGS AND
REQUIRING THEM AND SO ON.
BUT I&apos;VE GOT TO TELL YOU I GOT
SOME INFORMATION A COUPLE
OF WEEKS BACK ON THAT DEPO
PROJECT.
I THINK IT WAS THREE TWENTY
DEPOT AND YOU KNOW, I FORWARD
IT TO THE OWNER OF THAT
BUILDING AND THE RESPONSE AND
THE BACK AND FORTH THAT WE HAD
WAS WAS VERY PROMISING AND HE
JUST WAS KIND OF UNAWARE OF THE
OPTIONS THAT HE HAD FOR MAKING
A BUILDING CARBON NEUTRAL AND
AND HAS SORT OF MADE SORT OF A
GENERAL COMMITMENT TO LEARN
MORE AND SO ON AND HAS REACHED
OUT TO SOME OF THE PEOPLE THAT
I REFERRED HIM TO AND SO ON.
SO I&apos;M HOPEFUL THAT THAT MIGHT
SERVE AS AN EXAMPLE FOR US TO
WORK WITH THESE DEVELOPERS AND
SAY HEY, CAN WE CAN WE GET A
LITTLE BIT BETTER THING?
AND SPEAKING OF BETTER THINGS
THAT I FEEL LOWERTOWN ALL THE
TIME AND I&apos;M SURE YOU&apos;RE ALL
ANNOYED BY THAT BUT I&apos;M EQUALLY
ANNOYED THAT PEOPLE BRING UP
LOCKWOOD AS SOME KIND OF A.
HOUSING THING BECAUSE WHEN WE
VOTED DOWN THE FIRST LOCKWOOD,
THE ULTIMATE RESULT OF THAT WAS
A BETTER, BIGGER PROJECT IN A
DIFFERENT PART OF TOWN THAT HAD
MORE AFFORDABLE UNITS IN IT.
AND SO SOMETIMES YOU HAVE TO
SAY NO TO THE FIRST THING THAT
COMES ALONG TO GET THE RIGHT
THING AND THAT WAS THE CASE
WITH LOCKWOOD I GUESS I GUESS
FINALLY I&apos;M GOING TO SAY THAT,
YOU KNOW, SOMETIMES BUMMED OUT
THAT WE SPEAK AS A BODY BECAUSE
WHEN PEOPLE GO BACK AND LOOK AT
KEYS THAT CAN HAPPEN WHEN
YOU&apos;RE ON COUNCIL, JEFF, YOU
KNOW AND THEN OH, I&apos;M GOING TO
BE ABLE TO DO IS REFERRED TO
COUNCILWOMAN NELSON&apos;S FINE
ACCOUNTING WHERE I SAID NO AND
NO AND NO OVER AND OVER AGAIN,
YOU KNOW, AND SO I I&apos;M TAKE MY
OWN SATISFACTION IN THAT FOR
THE COMMUNICATION FROM COUNCIL
COUNCIL OVER SONG JUST TO SPEAK
A LITTLE BIT ABOUT MENTAL
HEALTH SERVICES AND SUPPORTS IN
A COMMUNITY COMMUNITY THE
COUNTY&apos;S COMMUNITY MENTAL
HEALTH PROGRAM HAVING A CORE
REALLY PROVIDER MEETING ON
OCTOBER 18TH FROM 10 A.M. TO
12:00 P.M. SO THAT&apos;S A REALLY
GOOD TIME AND PLACE PERHAPS TO
ENGAGE OUR PROVIDERS AND SEE
WHERE THEIR INPUT MIGHT BE IN
SUPPORTING OUR YOUTH AND OUR
COMMUNITY.
&gt;&gt; I THINK SOME OF US MIGHT
ALREADY BE AWARE OF GARRETT
SPACE WHICH IS STARTED BY MY
FAMILY HERE IN TOWN.
THAT&apos;S ALSO A RESOURCE FOR
YOUNG PEOPLE WHO ARE ALSO
STRUGGLING.
&gt;&gt; THANKS FOR THE COMMUNICATION
FROM COUNCIL THERE MOTION TO
ADJOURN PLEASE LEAVE I THROUGH
OUR SECOND COUNSELOR DENHA
DISCUSSION ON FAVOR POSED.
&gt;&gt; WE ARE ADJOURNED